Armenian nationalist forgery of French intelligence in order to discredit French denier of Armenian Genocide?

I’ve massively updated my blog post on the possibility that French intelligence had blacklisted Turkish diaspora nationalist movements as Turkish state agents provocateurs. Here, I highlight the evidence that Armenian nationalists forged the document in order to defame deniers of the Armenian Genocide.

First and foremost,

    The French Interior Ministry has ‘denied the allegations of marking [blacklisting] [fisleme iddialarini yalanladi]‘; and it has ‘explained that this report has no relationship with the truth/no connection with reality [bu raporun gerçekle bir iliskisi olmadigini açikladilar]‘.
    French intelligence agencies have insisted that ‘we did not prepare such a report [Böyle bir rapor hazirlamadik]‘.
    The Turkish Embassy in Paris has accepted the French explanation and blamed a ‘Turkophobia specific to certain extremist circles and based on primitive lies [turcophobie propre à certains milieux extrémistes et fondé sur des mensonges primitifs]‘.

There are other signs that the document was false and the news reports unreliable and biased. One of the targets of the forgery, Maxime Gauin (who ‘do[es] not deny that numerous crimes were committed against a part of the Armenian civilian population’, but does ‘deny that the genocide label is accurate for the Armenian losses in 1915-1916'), explained:

    ‘The “report” of the DCRI [which is available on Calameo and elsewhere] is a crude forgery.’
    ‘I am not, and I have never been, an agent for any intelligence or counter-intelligence agency.’
    ‘I am not, and I have never been, a temporary intern in USAK—another error of the “report”. I am a full time researcher in this think-tank.’
    ‘Today’s Zaman did not contact me before it published its allegation. Their journalist did not contact anybody among the persons accused in this “document”.’
    The editor-in-chief of Armenews, Jean-Marc Ara Toranian, was the head of the political arm of the Armenian Secret Army for Liberation of Armenia (ASALA, terrorist group) in France from 1976 to 1983…. Not surprisingly, Armenews published about the allegations against me, but not about my replies, or the about the replies of other persons….

Indeed, Armenews reported my original blog post about Today’s Zaman‘s publication of the allegations in the document.

    I alerted Armenews that there was new, relevant, important information, which undermined the source for the original story; but they did not update their article, reply or otherwise acknowledge my message.

It seems that Armenian nationalist activists forged a French intelligence report in order to defame and discredit deniers of the Armenian Genocide.