Finders Not Keepers: Yale Returns Artifacts To Peru
Between 1912 and 1915, Yale explorer Hiram Bingham III excavated thousands of artifacts from Machu Picchu — an Inca site perched high in the Andes Mountains. Many of those objects have now been returned to Peru, after spending 100 years at Yale University.High in the Andes Mountains, Peruvians have been lining up to see a collection of antiquities that have finally returned home. The objects from the Inca site of Machu Picchu spent the past 100 years at Yale University in Connecticut, where they were at the center of a long-running international custody battle.This human skeleton is among the objects that Yale has returned to Peru

Now, the university is giving back thousands of ceramics, jewelry and human bones from the Peabody Museum in New Haven to the International Center for the Study of Machu Picchu and Inca Culture.

Yale anthropology professor Richard Burger has been in charge of the ancient artifacts for nearly 30 years. Standing in the courtyard of a museum in Cuzco, Peru, he says the historic building was placed above an Inca palace — set atop a foundation of ancient Inca stone walls.

"The Inca who built this palace was the son of Pachacutec or Pachacuti, as he's sometimes called," Burger says. "Pachacuti was responsible for building Machu Picchu, so in some way, the materials are returning to the son of the builder of Machu Picchu. It's like bringing back the family goods."

The objects in question were excavated between 1912 and 1915 by Yale explorer Hiram Bingham III. They left Peru under a special governmental decree.

"The Machu Picchu situation and dispute was really fundamentally different from other repatriation issues," Burger says.

Unlike many art and artifact disputes, this one was not about stolen goods, explains Sharon Flescher, executive director of the International Foundation for Art Research, which helps track looted antiquities.
Explorer Hiram Bingham III, shown above in 1917, embarked on multiple expeditions to Machu Picchu in the 1910s. The Inca site was known to locals but largely forgotten internationally. In 1911, Bingham wrote about Machu Picchu in National Geographic magazine and refocused international attention on the ruins

"They were never allegedly taken in violation of patrimony laws, or clandestinely dug up," Flescher says. "This was really much more of a contractual dispute."

Peruvian officials contended that the materials were loaned to Yale for research. After World War I, the university returned some of the artifacts, but argued that the school could keep the rest under the laws of the day.

Over time, Peru's demands grew louder. Machu Picchu is an iconic place for the Peruvian people, and the idea of bones and artifacts from Peru being held in the U.S. took on a powerful symbolism.

In 2008, Peru's government filed a lawsuit against Yale. Negotiations intensified, and a letter from Yale alumni urging their alma mater to return the artifacts helped move the process out of the courts. Peruvian historian Mariana Mould de Pease was happy to avoid the expensive legal route. She says Yale alumni played a key role in "getting this matter where it has to be — in the academic world."
n November 2010, Peruvians held a demonstration in Lima demanding that Yale return the artifacts taken by Bingham.

The dispute was resolved through two separate agreements. The first, between Yale and the Peruvian government, established that the university would return all of the objects by the end of 2012.

The second established a partnership between Yale and the San Antonio Abad University in Cuzco to share stewardship of the collection. The schools will also collaborate on academic research. Keeping the antiquities in a scholarly setting was key, says David Bingham, grandson of the explorer who found them.

"To leave it just to the political system in Peru — that would be worrisome," Bingham says. "It is so uncertain, whereas the universities in Peru are as old as the universities in the United States."

Flescher, of the International Foundation for Art Research, says the focus is back where it should be — on the collection.
Musicians perform at the inaugural ceremony of the International Center for the Study of Machu Picchu and Inca Culture — a partnership between Yale University and The National University of San Antonio Abad in Cuzco.

"The settlement itself shifts the emphasis from the ownership of the objects — whether it's Peru or Yale — to stewardship and preservation and research and exhibition," she says.

This story has unfolded over 100 years, during a time of tremendous shifts in attitudes toward cultural patrimony, Flescher says. "Whether they're the Mediterranean countries with Greek and Roman classical objects, whether they're the Latin countries with Aztec, Mayan and Inca ruins, the current trend seems to be leaning towards the source countries and helping them reclaim objects that were taken when they had less power," she says.

Back in Cuzco, professors from both schools met to inaugurate the new museum. Among them was Oscar Paredes, who teaches social sciences at the university in Cuzco.

He says Peruvian professors are finally on equal footing with their Yale counterparts. And now, alongside the hundreds of thousands of tourists who pass through Cuzco each year to visit the terraced stone ruins of Machu Picchu, the citizens of Peru will be able to see the historic relics many have never seen before.
  

Protecting Peru
'
s ancient past

The return to Peru of the bones of 177 people taken a century ago from the Inca city of Machu Picchu has marked another important milestone in the repatriation of Peruvian antiquities.

The country is the birthplace of many ancient civilisations.

The most famous, the Incas, ruled the area for centuries until the arrival of the Spanish colonisers in the 1500s.

Every year, more than a million visitors marvel at the site which has become synonymous with Inca culture: the ancient city of Machu Picchu.

Perched high on a mountain top in the Andes, it is Peru's most important tourist destination.

But the almost 50,000 pieces found there between 1911 and 1915 had not been seen in Peru until recently.

Slow return

They had been housed at Yale University in the United States.

The university is only now beginning to return them, after Peru waged a long diplomatic and legal campaign to recover the artefacts, which it said had only been loaned to Yale.

In March, Yale shipped a large number of ceramics taken from the site back to Peru.

It is a move some had come to doubt would happen. One of them is Blanca Alba, who is in charge of repatriations at Peru's ministry of culture.

"I never thought I would see the return of the pieces," she says, her eyes getting teary as she remembers the arrival of the ceramics nine months ago.

"There were people waiting at the airport, they began singing the national anthem, I cried because it was very emotional."

Some of the ceramics are now being shown at a temporary exhibition space in Cuzco, while a new museum is being built to house the pieces once their return is complete.

Costly repatriations

But despite the satisfaction of bringing back the antiquities, Ms Alba believes it would be more cost-effective if the government prevented archaeological treasures from leaving the country in the first place.
Continue reading the main story
“Start Quote
Blanca Alba

    I never thought I would see the return of the pieces”

Blanca Alba Head of Repatriations, Ministry of Culture

"The problem is that repatriations are expensive," she says.

"They involve a court case, and you need to pay lawyers, transportation, packing, insurance, laboratory tests, etc," she explains.

In 2007, the Peruvian government estimated that it spent $625,000 (£400,000) on the repatriation of some 400 antiquities.

Ms Alba believes repatriating antiquities is, in the long term, a price worth paying, but she would prefer it if more was done to fight looting.

Preventing looting

The Peruvian government estimates that there are around 100,000 archaeological sites in Peru, of which only little more than a 10th have been uncovered.

When they do come to public notice, it is often because treasure hunters and professional looters have already been there.

People who are caught looting can expect a jail sentence of up to eight years.

But Director of Archaeology at the Peruvian ministry of culture Luis Caceres believes this is not enough.

"The reality is that, because of lack of funds and resources, we can't defend our heritage," he says.

He says it is impossible to provide security at all of the archaeological sites, especially with police busy fighting street crime.

Satellite technology

Mr Caceres admits the task is made more difficult by the fact that many sites are still undiscovered.
Satellite image of Cahuachi Experts say satellite images such as this one can show where looting has taken place

But he is encouraged by successes in Guatemala, where ancient ruins were found in the jungle using satellite imagery.

The technology allows archaeologists to see what is not always visible on aerial photographs, or what is hidden under layers of dirt and rock, or under a dense tree canopy.

Nicola Masini of Italy's Institute for Archaeological and Monumental Heritage has been using satellite imagery in Peru since 2007.

He says there are many advantages.

"Most archaeological sites in Peru are located in areas that have difficult accessibility, in the desert or the highlands, where it's difficult to do direct surveillance or aerial surveillance."

Mr Masini believes satellites could also be used to combat looting, because they reveal the presence of fresh excavations.

"The only way to monitor and manage this problem is with satellite data," he says.

'Losing history'

"It would be useful to the Peruvian authorities, so they can put adequate strategies in place for the protection of these remote archaeological sites," he adds.

Mr Caceres at the ministry of culture in Lima welcomes the use of this technology, despite its potentially high cost.

But he thinks satellite imagery should not be the only weapon in Peru's arsenal.

He would like to see public campaigns being launched to show rural communities that, in the long run, they could profit more from sites which are carefully managed by archaeologists.

He argues that those sites are likely to attract more tourists than those that have been looted, bringing badly needed cash to remote communities.

What is at stake, he says, is Peru's heritage, "because if an artefact leaves the country," he concludes, "with it, we are forever losing our history.