Indo - Greek Tetradrachm of Hippostratus 65-55 BCE Very Fine Condition Refer 

Brief History of this coin is as under:

Hippostratus was an Indo-Greek king who ruled western Punjab from around 65 to 55 BCE. He was probably the son of Apollodotus II, and the two kings may have belonged to the dynasty of Menander I.

The quantity and quality of the coinage of Hippostratus indicate a quite powerful king. He seems to have fought rather successfully against the Indo-Scythian invaders, led by the Scythian king Azes I.

Azes ultimately won in the fight with Hippostratus, and overstruck many of the latter's coins.

Coins of Hippostratus

Hippostratus issued silver coins with a diademed portrait on the obverse, and three reverses. The first is the image of a king on prancing horse, a common type which was most frequently used by the earlier kings Antimachus II and Philoxenus. The second reverse also portrays a king on horseback, but the horse is walking and the king making a benediction gesture - this type resembles a rare type of Apollodotus II. The third is a standing goddess, perhaps Tyche.

What we are offering is NOT A SILVER COIN. Also note that we are not sure if this is a replica or a coin issued in the same period with a different metal.

This coin is Tetradrachm of Hippostratus, reigned circa 65-55 BCE. (Type third as mentioned in the above description of coin types). There is no reserve price being set up and if you are the winner the coin would certainly be sent across to you.

Obverse: Bust of Hippostratus with Greek legend BASILEOS SOTEROS / IPPOSTPATOU "Saviour King Hippostratos". ??S???OS SO????S ????S??????, Bust with diadem.

Reverse: Goddess with cornucopia in left hand, making a gesture of benediction with right hand, similar to the Buddhist vitarka mudra. Kharoshthi legend: MAHARAJASA TRATASA HIPUSTRATASA "King Hippostratos, the Saviour.

Weight - Approx 9.6 grams

Diameter - Approx 27 mm

Composition - This coin is NOT made of silver

Condition - Very Fine. Please refer to the pictures and bid with confidence as exactly the same coin would be sent across to you.

The coin is in good condition so bid with confidence. There is no reverse price being set up for any of our listings so if you are the winner, then the item would surely be dispatched within 3 working days of receiving clear payment. The starting bid price is far lesser than the actual market value of the coin. We are confident that our customers will assess it right and bid accordingly. We accept payments through Paypal.

Return Policy – We are responsible for our products and respect your decision to return the item, if it does not meet your expectations. We offer 100% refund of the cost price, however the shipping & handling charges are to be borne by the buyer. Please note that the item should be returned within 15 days of receipt for processing of refund. 

Shipping Policy - Through international registered Post and the delivery time would vary. For UK, the delivery would be in between 10-15 days. For US & rest of the world it would be between 20-25 days.

Shipping Discounts Policy - We do offer combined shipping and pass on the shipping saves to customers. If you win/ buy more than 1 item, then please send an invoice request and we will send the invoice with combined shipping discount.

Feedback Policy - Feedback would be updated for every transaction and we would request you to take out some time, from your busy schedule, and provide us with feedback. Your feedback will help us in building our brand on Ebay and would also inform other customers of quality of our service & products. 

We would be glad to address any clarifications that you may have and thank you for your time & interest in our products.