Artifacts returned to Saudi Arabia

National Guard chief hands rare artifacts to SCTA

RIYADH: Prince Miteb bin Abdullah, minister of state, Cabinet member, and commander of the National Guard, has handed a number of rare antiques and heritage pieces to the Saudi Commission for Tourism and Antiquities (SCTA).

Prince Sultan bin Salman, president of SCTA, received the artifacts from Prince Miteb. Several prominent figures, including Prince Saad bin Miteb, and Ali Al-Ghabban, vice president of the antiquities and museums sector at SCTA, attended the function held Friday evening.

Prince Miteb’s gesture came in response to a national campaign to retrieve the Kingdom’s artifacts that was launched by Prince Sultan last month. The heritage pieces will be displayed at the first National Exhibition for Retrieved Artifacts, which will begin on Sunday at the National Museum in Riyadh on the sidelines of the ongoing 27th Janadriyah National Heritage and Cultural Festival.

In a press statement, Prince Miteb, who is also chairman of the Janadriyah festival's supreme committee, said his move was part of a national duty to return precious heritage pieces to the SCTA in order to preserve and showcase them as invaluable treasures representing the Kingdom’s rich civilization and glorious history. “In response to the initiative taken by the SCTA to retrieve the artifacts, I am proud to hand them over to preserve them, carry out studies on them, as well as to showcase them at exhibitions and in museums,” he said.

On his part, Prince Sultan thanked Prince Miteb for his noble gesture to return the artifacts, adding it was a great boost to the commission’s efforts to preserve the precious pieces and prevent them from being smuggled out of the Kingdom. Several citizens and foreigners returned several artifacts to the SCTA in response to the ongoing national campaign.

Prince Sultan received a number of dignitaries from the Arab and foreign countries who arrived to participate in the international seminar on retrieved artifacts at the SCTA headquarters on Saturday. He also received a number of citizens and foreigners who have returned artifacts to the SCTA. These people will be honored at the seminar, which will begin on Sunday on the sidelines of the National Exhibition for Retrieved Artifacts at the National Museum.

As part of the cultural activities of the Janadriyah festival, a seminar on “Saudi–Korea Relations and Future Horizons” was held on Saturday. Dr. Ahmad Muhammad Al-Dabeeb, former president of King Saud University (KSU), presided over the session. Abdul Salam Suleiman of KSU as well as five university professors from South Korea addressed the seminar.

In his speech, Abdul Rahman Lee, imam of Islamic center in Seoul, has shed light on the situation of Muslims in Korea and the prominent role being played by Saudi Arabia in the propagation of Islam in his country.

The Technical and Vocational Training Corporation will launch its open theater for children on Sunday. The theater will feature several entertainment programs for children as well as competitions, staging dramas and demonstration of cartoon characters.