Five Works of Art from Dutch National Collection to be Restituted

Landscape with cattle in a shallow river,
Theobald Michau – photo: RCE, NK 2837
PRESS RELEASE
The Hague, 2 February 2012
RESTITUTIONS COMMITTEE ISSUES RECOMMENDATIONS CONCERNING FOUR
CLAIMS TO LOOTED ART
THE HAGUE - The Restitutions Committee has advised the State Secretary for
Education, Culture and Science on four claims to a total of 23 works of art from
the Dutch National Art Collection. The Committee recommends the restitution of
five works of art to the former owners’ heirs. The State Secretary has adopted
the recommendations.
On 19 December 2011, the Committee issued a
positive recommendation on an application for the
restitution of two paintings. The Committee
concluded that they were
originally owned by French
art dealer and politician
Edouard Jonas and seized
in Bordeaux in 1940 in the
name of Hermann Göring.
In 1944, the works were part of a swap in which Göring
relinquished them to art dealer Alois Miedl in exchange for a
work by Vermeer, which later turned out to be a forgery by Han
van Meegeren. After the war, the two paintings ended up in the
Netherlands Art Property Collection. The Committee advised
returning the paintings to Jonas's heirs. [RC 1.117]
On 21 November 2011, the Committee issued a negative recommendation on three
works of art that were said to have been owned by Jewish banker Adolf Arnhold. The
Committee concluded that it was not proven with a high degree of probability that the
works were originally owned by Arnhold, and as such it advised the State Secretary to
reject the claim. [RC 1.61-A]
Portrait of a man with dog,
unknown 16th-century master,
Photo: RCE, NK 2828
two miniature slippers, glazed pottery
with polychrome décor, Delft, first half
18th century – photo: RCE, NK 302 A-B
The Committee issued a (partially) positive recommendation in a third case, dated
14 November 2011. In it, the Committee concluded that three ceramic objects were
indeed owned by Jewish antiques dealer Aron
Salomon Hiegentlich. It also concluded that
Hiegentlich lost possession of these objects
involuntarily during the war. The Committee advised
rejecting the part of the claim to a fourth ceramic
object, because it transpired that Hiegentlich had not
owned this object. Based on these conclusions, the
Committee advised returning three of the four
claimed objects to Hiegentlich's family. [RC 1.116]
In the fourth recommendation, dated 13 October 2011, the Committee advised rejecting
a claim to fourteen works of art that had come into the possession of German art dealer
Alois Miedl in 1940 through Jewish art dealer De Haan. The Committee concluded that it
was not proven with a high degree of probability that the works were originally owned by
De Haan. There were no indications either that Miedl directly coerced or pressured De
Haan during the transactions. [RC 1.106]
The Restitutions Committee
Since January 2002, the Advisory Committee on the Assessment of Restitution
Applications for Items of Cultural Value and the Second World War has issued 107
recommendations and 130 claims have been presented to it. The Committee is chaired
by Willibrord Davids.
