Acquittal by prescription from U.S. merchant Robert Hecht in a gigantic traffic of Roman antiquities

The trial of Robert Hecht ended last week. The American dealer accused of leading an international trafficking of ancient works of art since the 1950s, has benefited from the limitation period. This decision closes a trial in which river were also involved former curator of the Getty Museum, Marion True, and the dealer Giacomo Medici.The trial for illegal trafficking of antiquities which was held in Rome since 2005 is now complete. Robert Hecht, an American merchant aged 92, was acquitted last week. The man was accused of masterminding an association of dealers in antiques. The network provided since the 1950 objects from clandestine excavations at various museums and collectors. Charges that Robert Hecht has never directly denied.

"I have no idea of what an object comes from excavations," he said again Thursday in a telephone interview to Los Angeles Times , "it could have been dug up a hundred years ago or an hour ago." As the former curator of the Getty Museum in October 2010, Marion True , Robert Hecht has benefited from the irregularities. The Italian merchant Giacomo Medici, third accused of criminal conspiracy, he has been sentenced to eight years in prison and 10 million euro fine.

The prosecutor, Paolo Ferri, deplores the slowness of Italian justice - 18 hearings were held in six years for the case Hecht - who failed to complete the time trial despite "abundant evidence" of which he is to have . He cites among other manuscripts in the hand of Hecht that mention the use of "clandestine diggers" and an organization seized on the premises where the retailer name is associated with a series of names of looters. This evidence also is sufficient to convince many museums to return more than one hundred objects from this traffic to Italy.Like other major American museums, the J. Paul Getty Museum in Los Angeles has returned, in 2007, 40 antiquities to Italy, including the priceless statue of Aphrodite, acquired in dubious circumstances in connection with the case Hecht, Marion True was then curator at the museum
