Provenance Research Training Program - Magdeburg, Germany June 10-15, 2012

I am pleased to inform you of the forthcoming launch of the Provenance Research Training Program (PRTP) website through which prospective candidates will be able to apply. Its aim is to 


    Provide advanced training in provenance research and related issues concerning Nazi looted art, Judaica, and other cultural property. Intensive ?ve day workshops repeated several times a year in different locations across Europe and the Americas will provide advanced training for the international community of  current and future experts engaged in dealing with issues concerning cultural plunder during the Third Reich, the Holocaust, and World War II.



The first workshop is scheduled to take place in Magdeburg, Germany, between June 10, 2012, and June 15, 2012. Deadline for applications is March 5, 2012. The co-sponsor of this first workshop is the Koordinierungsstelle Magdeburg and the administrative support for it is being provided by the New York-based Claims Conference and the central office of the European Shoah Legacy Institute (ESLI). The link for the website is www.provenanceresearch.org.

The Provenance Research Training Program (PRTP)

The Provenance Research Training Program (PRTP) is a project of the European Shoah Legacy Institute (ESLI) created by the Czech Ministry of Foreign Affairs in furtherance of the Holocaust Era Assets Conference held in Prague in 2009 and the resulting Terezin Declaration endorsed by 47 countries. The program focuses on provenance research and related issues concerning Nazi-looted art, Judaica, and other cultural property. It provides advanced training to serve the international community of current and future experts engaged in dealing with issues concerning cultural plunder during the Third Reich, the Holocaust and World War II. Each year the program offers week-long workshops that provide an intensive historical overview of cultural plunder—its evolution and implementation; methodological training, including specialized research in public and private archives; a presentation and discussion of legal concepts and instrumentalities at national and international levels, including political, moral and ethical issues and restitution policies and principles. In addition to facilitating research and providing access to a vast array of information, the program will promote the establishment of international networks of provenance researchers that will bring together experts in all relevant fields and countries.