Heartbreaking: Paypal orders buyer to destroy an antique violin

The online company paypal ordered the buyer of an antique violin to destroy it in order to get his refund because the antiquity was deemed a counter-fit by paypal. The violin survived through WWII and was worth about 2,500$ U.S. The heartbreaking feature of this story is the fact that the buyer sent a picture of the destroyed violin to the previous owner. 

smh.com.au

PayPal has again come under fire, this time for ordering the buyer of an antique French violin to destroy it to get a refund - rather than send it back to the seller - after the giant deemed it a fake.

The seller says she has been left $US2500 out of pocket and without a "violin that made it through WWII" and wants to stop PayPal from ordering other antiquities to be destroyed when their authenticity is questioned.

Her view is backed by the owner of Sydney Violins, Zai Sheng, 63, who told Fairfax today that he believed the violin was not a counterfeit after being shown a picture of it smashed into pieces.

The Canadian buyer had taken the picture and sent it to the seller, a woman known only as Erica, who then wrote to Regretsy of the "heartbreaking experience".

She chose Regretsy, a site that features photos of interesting handmade artefacts, to highlight the dispute because it had recently had its own troubles with PayPal when its charitable gift buying program's account was shut down.

Erica's letter recounted how the buyer had disputed the musical instrument's label.

"Rather than have the violin returned to me, PayPal made the buyer DESTROY the violin in order to get his money back," she said. "They somehow deemed the violin as 'counterfeit' even though there is no such thing in the violin world."

She added that the buyer was so "proud of himself" that he "sent me a photo of the destroyed violin".

"I am now out a violin that made it through WWII as well as $US2500. This is of course, upsetting. But my main goal ... is to prevent PayPal from ordering the destruction of violins and other antiquities that they know nothing about. It is beyond me why PayPal simply didn't have the violin returned to me," she said.

According to Regretsy, the item had also reportedly been "examined and authenticated by a top luthier" before the sale.

Mr Sheng, who has been making violins for more than 20 years and playing them since he was a young boy, said the violin appeared authentic. He said you could "tell straight away" whether a violin was a fake by looking at the way it had been made, the varnish and discolouration.
But he said the buyer had paid too much for it. "I think it is the buyer's fault [here]," he said. "I don't think the seller is at fault. Even in a very good condition $US2500 ... is too much."

Mr Sheng said many people who bought violins online did not understand them. "You can buy from online but you have to know what you are looking for."

In a statement, PayPal said that, while it could not talk about Erica's case due to its privacy policy, it did "carefully review each case, and in general we may ask a buyer to destroy counterfeit goods if they supply signed evidence from a knowledgeable third party that the goods are indeed counterfeit".

"For example, if somebody purchased a fake handbag, we'd ask them to contact the manufacturer of the bag, or reputable distributor, to authenticate that it is counterfeit.

"Further, we then ask the customer to sign a statutory declaration supporting their claim. As always, we encourage buyers and sellers to settle disputes first before requesting PayPal to intervene."

It said the reason it reserved the option to ask a buyer to destroy goods was that "in many countries, including the US, it is a criminal offense to mail counterfeit goods back to a seller".

It said it was possible for people to buy a real item and a fake one and use the fake one to claim a refund, leaving the seller of the real item out of pocket. But it said it would "report" such activity. This kind of illegal activity has been highlighted by Rik Ferguson of online security company Trend Micro.

"This is one of the benefits of PayPal. We have a closed loop system - that is visibility (a record of personal details/transactions) of both buyer and seller. We are proud of the secure platform we have developed to enable buyers and sellers to confidently transact across the country/the globe," PayPal said.