A Petition to stop the Looting of Egypt’s Archaeological Sites

Though this website primarily is a collection of listed links, the following one is to a petition for signatures… everything has to be tried…

People have to dare to speak out and have this stopped, in spite of personal fears, and the Egyptians need support… speaking out is the only thing to do, philosophically and in so many other ways… otherwise the wrangling will continue…

Apparently mafia-like criminals are in some places in charge of systematized looting, and it is doubtful that the poorest people would get any real profit from these activities, even if involved…

Hopefully the situation, which does not endanger tourists, will soon be under control… it is problematic as well that Egypt has very many pressing concerns, and protecting sites in more rural areas can easily end up very far down on the list, which is why the international community can aid by drawing attention to the issue… even sites near Cairo have been looted during the past half year… Abu Sir is one of them…

As far as I know, tourism is the second largest income generating industry in Egypt, and many visitors come to see the sites… and the security issues are also important if they are to return in larger numbers… and in the long run, assuming that sites away from the beaten track are secured and tourist facilities are built in those under-developed areas and thereby creating income for the people, only trying to save the sites from being destroyed will help the people who are struggling to make ends meet…

Just having an opinion on the internet can also be beset with worries, and there are many very well informed people who are extremely careful about what they say or do not say… even in the international community… yet even this seems to have become less the case after the issue has been publicized and debated in parliament…

So to all those who are in any way concerned about any of this… and are intrepid enough… there are more reasons to sign, than just to hope for the best…

Please keep on signing and sending on… Many are unwilling to do so but it is imperative if we want to hopefully step up the pressure on the authorities and stop the destruction of El Hibeh, Beni Suef, and many other sites…

This is a online petition at Avaaz, with the aim of getting 1500 signatures. The first 1100 have already been sent to Dr. Mohamed Ibrahim, Minister of Antiquities, Supreme Council of Antiquities, Dr. Mostafa Amin, Secretary General, Supreme Council of Antiquities and Kamal Ganzouri, Prime Minister of Egypt