American Anthropological Association Letter to SpikeTV & National Geographic 

Letters Opposing Reality TV Shows on Unethical Archaeological Dig Practices

AAA President, Leith Mullings writes letters of opposition to producers of new television shows which wrongly represent archaeology as a treasure-seeking adventure, in which our collective heritage is dug up and sold for monetary gain. Click here (.pdf) to read the letter to National Geographic for their show Diggers, and here (.pdf) for the letter to Spike TV for their show American Diggers.

MCAT Revision - Letters to Advisory Committee
AAA President, Leith Mullings and Society for Medical Anthropology President, Douglas Feldman co-write letters to MCAT Advisory Committee in response to exam revision. Letters were sent to Dr. S. Gabbe (.pdf) and Dr. H. Sondheimer (.pdf).

Executive Director, Bill Davis, Responds to the Request for Information issued by the Office of Science and Technology Policy
Letter to the Office of Science and Technology Policy in regards to Public Access to Scholarly Publications. Click here to download letter(.pdf).

Is Governor Scott Asking for an Anthropologist Exodus in Florida?
Governor Scott says Florida "doesn't need a lot more anthropologists in this state." Click here to download (.pdf) President Dominguez's response to the Governor. To sign the petition to request a meeting with Governor Scott, click here.

Action Alert: Contact Your Senators Today - Urge Them to Restore Funding for NSF

Your help is needed to encourage the full Senate to support the House bill that rejects cuts to NSF. Both the House and the Senate have developed appropriations legislation that would cut funding for Education and Human Resources programs at NSF, but the House would cut roughly $6 million less than the Senate. Learn more.

U.S. Bioethics Committee Releases Report on the Public Health Service's Supported Research on STDs in Guatemala in the 1940's

Following the revelation that the PHS supported research on sexually transmitted diseases in Guatemala from 1946 to 1948, President Obama asked the Bioethics Committee to oversee a thorough fact-finding investigation into the studies. The PHS research involved intentionally exposing and infecting vulnerable populations to sexually transmitted disease without the subjects' consent. Read the complete report (pdf).

AAA Releases General Statement on Immigration

Following the passage of anti-immigration laws in several states, the Executive Board's Ad Hoc Group on Immigration has released a statement making recommendations to avoid investing in areas that sponsor or pass such legislation. Click here to read the General Statement.

HHS Seeks Comments on Human Subjects Rule

The Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) recently announced a notice of proposed rulemaking (ANPRM) for "Human Subjects Research: Enhancing Protections for Research Subjects and Reducing Burden, Delay and Ambiguity for Investigators. For more information, click here.

AAA Urges Members To Protect Research Funding

In separate actions, two House Appropriations Subcommittees have passed funding bills for the NSF and NEH. To learn about how you can petition Congress for increased funding for these two agencies, click here.

Inviting thoughtful scholarly analysis to our new AAA Free Speech Anthropology Forum

Reactions to the early May 2011 capture and death of Osama Bin Laden are multiple and vary in intensity, yet it is clear that anthropologists have much knowledge and insight to offer each other and the rest of the world.  We launch a Free Speech Anthropology Forum tab on the AAA Blog now in order to stress the value of space for thoughtful, scholarly, and analytic debate and discussion among anthropologists and others we seek to reach.  AAA endorses and seeks to facilitate the space for dissent, free speech, and thoughtful analysis.  At times like this one, when many are either just euphoric or others offer critiques that look quite politically partisan, it may be more important than ever to endorse thoughtful, scholarly, analytic discussion and commentary.

The future will no doubt bring us other subjects of similar intensity and public attention, but this seems to be an especially apt time to launch our Free Speech Anthropology Forum tab on the AAA Blog, providing our members with the space and the opportunity to engage in important but possibly difficult exchanges over reactions to the Bin Laden death.

- Virginia R. Dominguez
President, American Anthropological Association

Resources to Help AAA Members Thoughtfully Assist the People of Japan at this Time of Crisis
With the assistance of SEAA's current president, Jennifer Robertson, AAA President Virginia R. Dominguez would like to make available to the entire membership the following resources: news sources, resources for finding people in Japan, donating funds, connecting with others, and otherwise finding ways to help the people of Japan. Learn more.

AAA Urges Members To Write To Congress Representatives
The Obama Administration recently released its budget for fiscal year 2012, the plan addresses a budget deficit that is expected to reach over $1.6 trillion dollars by the end of this fiscal year. Learn more.

AAA Responds to Howard University on the Closing of the Anthropology Department
President Virginia Dominguez expresses disappointment the in decision of closing the Anthropology department at Howard University and requests the university president to reconsider the decision. Learn more.

International Archaeological Community Call for Action in Egypt
Presidents of the International Archaeological Community write a statement, recognizing the multitude of priorities in this political situation, expressing prioritization for the protection of Egypt's cultural heritage and the preservation of Egypt's invaluable and irreplaceable archaeological history. Learn more.

AAA Signs Statement of Support of Egypt
In conjunction with the Archaeological Institute of America, AAA signs Statement of Support for Egypt. This statement shares its concern for the Egyptian people and the loss of cultural heritage that Egypt has sustained and the threat of further losses. Learn more.

WCAA Protests Treatment of Prominent Anthropologist
International society of anthropologists writes to Belgian officials to protest unfair treatment of Marianne Maeckelbergh. Learn more.

AAA Contributes to Discussion of Race on Capitol Hill
Members Brett Williams (American U) and Marc Lamont Hill (Columbia U) are panelists for "Race, Politics and Policy: A National Dialogue on Race." Learn more.

CBC issues RFP for Gulf Coast Environmental Remediation Projects
The Congressional Black Caucus, under the leadership of the CBC Energy & Environment Taskforce, has issued a Request for Proposals for recommendations on how BP, federal agencies and local networks can move towards long term recovery and restoration of the Gulf Coast Region. Learn more.

Committee for Human Rights Addresses Dam Project in Brazil
Writing to various Brazilian officials about the proposed Belo Monte Hydroelectric Project in Para, CfHR petitions for reconsideration of dam construction, as many local indigenous groups would be adversely affected. Learn more.

National Science Foundation Solicits Advice on Future Research Directions
Directorate for Social, Behavioral and Economic Sciences asks for white papers outlining "grand challenge" questions for the agency as part of  its plan to frame innovative research for the year 2020 and beyond. Learn more.

AAA Responds to Congressional Letter on Public Access Policies
Executive Director Bill Davis wrote a letter of support for a Congressional letter detailing the potential fallout of mandating free public access for published materials about federally funded research.  Learn more.

AAA Challenges Language Questions on US Census
President Virginia Dominguez asks agency to revise terminology describing linguistic abilities of non-English speakers.  Learn more.

AAA Executive Director Testifies on Capitol Hill
Bill Davis speaks to federal appropriators about the importance of NSF funding.  Learn more.

AAA Participates in Humanities Advocacy Day
AAA members and staff lobby Congress for increased humanities funding.  Learn more.

Honduras Resolution Passes
AAA members vote to support Honduran resistance against the recent coup d'etat.  Learn more.

Participate in National Humanities Advocacy Day
Anthropologists are invited to participate in a two-day event to promote federal support for research, education, and public programs in the humanities. Learn more.

AAA President's Statement on Haiti
AAA President Virginia Dominguez issued an action alert in response to the dire humanitarian crisis in Haiti following the Jan. 12 earthquake. Read her statement here.

CEAUSSIC Releases Final Report on Military's Human Terrain System
The AAA's Ad Hoc Commission on the Engagement of Anthropology with the US Security and Intelligence Communities has released its final report on the Army's Human Terrain System program. Learn more.

Anthropologists Discuss Race on Capitol Hill
RACE Project advisors Alan Goodman and Michael Blakey discussed race during a Congressional Black Caucus session honoring the 25th anniversary of the Rev. Jesse Jackson's first run for president. Learn more.

AAA & WCAA Release Statement on Peru
The AAA and Organizing Committee of the WCAA raise concerns about the violation of indigenous peoples' human, territorial and legal rights.  More here.

AAA Supports Visa Reform
AAA and 31 organizations signed onto the "Statement and Recommendations on Visa Problems Harming America's Scientific, Economic, and Security Interests."  Learn more.

AAA Advocates for Increased NEH Funding
Executive Director Bill Davis and Director of Public Affairs Damon Dozier meet with legislators to discuss funding for the National Endowment for the Humanities.  Learn more.

AAA to Host Second Advocacy Webinar of 2009
Members interested in promoting humanities related policies in their local districts should tune in on April 1, 2009.  Register here.

AAA Joins Call to End "Ideological Exclusion"
AAA signs letter to Obama Administration urging end of viewpoint-based exclusion of foreign scholars.  More here.

Friends of the Committee on Ethics Group Launched
Ad hoc body is designed to provide informal consultation to the Committee on Ethics concerning a wide range of matter.  Click for details.

Membership Approves Changes to Ethics Code
An overwhelming 87% of voters approved of the proposed changes to the ethics code.  Details are here.

AAA to Host Advocacy Webinar
Members interested in getting their voices heard by elected officials are welcome to join the AAA in its upcoming "how-to" guide to effective advocacy techniques.  Register here.

Visit your Legislator on Capitol Hill
Join AAA on National Humanities Advocacy Day to stress the importance of funding NEH and NEA to policymakers on Capitol Hill.  More info here.

Policy Briefs: A New Public Policy Resource
The AAA Committee on Public Policy is proud to introduce a new informational resource for the public policy community: The AAA Policy Brief. AAA Policy Briefs address policy issues and initiatives from an anthropological perspective, examining the insights that contemporary anthropological research contributes to policy discourse. These theme-focused briefs do not take a position on public policy issues. Instead, they introduce the reader to anthropological knowledge that is necessary for making fully-informed policy decisions.

Policy Brief #1 addresses a labor policy issue, specifically the right of employees to organize unions as outlined by the Employee Free Choice Act (H.R. 800, S. 1041). If you are interested in contributing to a future Policy Brief or in suggesting a future topic, please contact the Department of Public Affairs.