Breaking News: The Publication of the Chinese Antiquities Fraud Map

The publication of the Chinese antiquities fraud Map

Heritage fake map

layman is difficult to understand the huge heritage fraud system to fake goods from counterfeiting, this industrial chain in China has developed means of a wide variety of fraud. A professional art website this made-depth investigation, and the results are available for reference.
“underground

the website for old industry survey shows: ceramic fraud-hit to Jingdezhen, Jiangxi, Henan (Luoyang Mengjin Nan Stone Village, Yu Hsien Hou town, Baofeng), in Longquan, Zhejiang, Guangdong Chaozhou for weight; the bronze fraud-hit is the village of Yichuan County, Luoyang, Henan Province, smoke Stream village as the representative of counterfeiting; the jade fraud-hit: Henan (the town of Nanyang the County shifosi town), Anhui (BengBu), these areas are mainly Han Dynasty jade fraud to Liaoning 90% imitation Hongshan jade gathering place; the calligraphy fraud-hit: Tianjin Drum Tower in the most extensive, fake painting and calligraphy in Beijing Panjiayuan, Liulichang by the local inflow. Confucius Temple in Nanjing, and Qingliangshan antiques market is more serious local painting and calligraphy works are false.

ceramic

range: National

focus

disaster area: Jingdezhen, Jiangxi, Henan (Luoyang Mengjin Nan Stone Village, Yu County town of God Hou, Baofeng) and Longquan region of Fujian, Chaozhou, Guangdong

Jingdezhen ceramic has a long history, the specialized production of Yuan, Ming and Qing kiln high imitation goods. Reform has long been in Jingdezhen City, many of the original state-owned ceramic enterprises were divided into many small pieces, contracted out to private. The Bureau said the governing body of the Jingdezhen Porcelain of Jingdezhen porcelain, including not registered individual, private workshop, Jingdezhen City, pottery enterprise at least 4000, employing more than 100,000.
here, casually walked into a workshop, can be seen everywhere placed in the firing porcelain towards the generation of porcelain kiln can be seen everywhere. Here not only high imitation advanced customization, and also mass production of a variety of porcelain. Major antique markets for old porcelain mostly from here, here, too reclusive folk masters to do the porcelain.

three fake region

Henan most famous was undoubtedly yes the Henan the Yuzhou God Hou town and Luoyang Mengjin Nan Stone Village, and Henan Baofeng. God Hou town, the birthplace of the Chinese Jun porcelain culture, South Stone Village is the location of the modern imitation Tang Dynasty, Baofeng is a gathering place for fraud by the Chinese Ru porcelain. In these three areas, the local farmers to master all of them are fake, but relative to the monograph in high imitation crafts, folk artists, farmers fraud only flicker ordinary collectors, high imitation crafts can reach the effect of the real ones.
The the

most absurd is that the high water of Luoyang, Henan Mengjin Nan Stone Village Wang firing imitation of the Northern Wei Dynasty figurines, crafts, antique market in Beijing precious cultural relics of national institutions as a rescue takeover of Northern Wei. Probably as follows: an expert in the antique market in Beijing flea market to see one of the Northern Wei Dynasty figurines, at a time of Luoyang stolen the graves of the Northern Wei Dynasty, the experts believe that the precious heritage of the Northern Wei Dynasty, and then reported to the National Museum special rescue of the acquisition on the antique market, earmarked, Northern Wei precious figurines “.

But along with this market, the Northern Wei Dynasty figurines are more and more, some experts questioned. Later, police intervention, six steps, identified according to the various objections raised by these figurines, Luoyang, Henan Mengjin Nan Stone Village Shuiwang imitation Later, under the witness of the scene the police, high Shuiwang and burn out one identical to the Northern Wei Dynasty figurines.

Bronze

distribution: Henan, Hubei, Shanxi

the hardest hit: Yichuan County, Luoyang, Henan Province, smoke Stream Village

Yichuan County,

Henan Province smoke Stream Village is the famous bronze of the village “, this of the Central Plains region, a common enough in rural areas, but produce high imitation bronze well-known Chinese and even the world.

data show that the professional processing of the village households to more than 300, employing up to 1880 more than the annual output value of more than 9000 million, the main products of the Eastern Han Dynasty horse riding swallows East emperor week driving six Warring States Period, Fang Ding, spring and autumn lotus crane more than 1,000 square pots and a variety of shapes wall, antique lamps and other kinds of product sales to China of Hong Kong, Macao and Taiwan regions, is more in demand in Southeast Asia, the merchants of the United States, Britain, Japan, Canada, France, Germany and other countries is very fond of the smoke stream antique bronze.

In fact, the Heluo areas Luoyang center there are a large number of bronze Village “,” fake village, the village men, women can be produced bronze. Every day thousands of antique bronzes from the flow of the country and the world.

“Henan-made” is a troublesome word of the collectors and the identification sector, many experts had planted in Henan made “. Into the large and small antique market in Beijing, each bronze point of sale are produced in Henan bronze. History left to the process of casting bronze of the people here, in this early awakening of the land, the Bronze Age casting of the Xia, Shang and Zhou Jiuding emperor, however, into the 20th century, with the collection of hot tide of the Henan region a number of approved counterfeiting village came into being.

jade

distribution: Henan, Liaoning, Gansu, Zhejiang, Anhui

the hardest hit: Henan (Nanyang Zhenping shifosi, town), Anhui (Bengbu)

investigation report mentioned: “the world jade carving the town level, the number of” the town as early as the Han Dynasty began production of jade, and now the town tens of thousands by the jade business to feed their families. Zhenping County Government official website of the material also showed that only shifosi town has 13 jade specialized villages, six jade professional market, the town more than 50,000 employees.
In the

2010, the town jade industry output value reached 1.02 billion yuan, 7480 yuan per capita cash income of farmers, from the jade industry share of 75%. Henan Nanyang City, China’s largest Jade gathering place for small jade necklace, such as a grain of rice, two-meter-high apparatus ornaments, Xinjiang and Hetian jade, Huanglong, Yunnan, Russia Yu, HAN, Afghanistan, jade and other everything.

Bengbu is a jade collection by scared of the place in one hundred square kilometers of Bengbu urban area, the distribution of more than 3,000 jade plus workshops, composed of a number of famous jade village “,” Jade Street . During the nearly 10 million sales industry to jade, about 1/8 of the total urban population numbers, the annual product sales of nearly five billion yuan, accounting for about 1/6 of the total number of regional GDP.

paintings

distribution: Beijing, Nanjing, Tianjin, Xian, Jiangsu

the hardest hit: Tianjin (Drum Tower), Beijing (Panjiayuan, Liulichang) and Nanjing (Confucius Temple and the Qingliang antique market)

calligraphy is hot on the art market categories billion price of the auction are also created by the calligraphy and paintings, such as Zhang Daqian, Qi Baishi masterpieces collectors have sought after. Into the Liulichang However, the largest number of imitation painting and calligraphy are also masters, also with a certain authority, certificate of authenticity, what is more, the artist and the original photos of course, plus a certificate and photo The photo is another billing.
will be a generic low level of fake paintings

calligraphy and painting circles line called the mainstream. In addition to the low level of features, licensed its prominent features: wide head and a large number of low cost. Cost tens of dollars to a couple of hundred dollars.

licensed with regional characteristics can be divided into Tianjin licensed, fake paintings of Nanjing, Anhui imitation goods, the Panjiayuan goods and other parts of fake goods. The most famous of which is licensed to Tianjin, and the largest number of employees up, mainly in Tianjin Drum Tower.

Nanjing fake paintings, mainly concentrated in the Confucius Temple in Nanjing and the Qingliangshan antique markets and other places, imitation Jinling School Qian (Qian Songyan), Song (Song Wenzhi) Asia (Binyamin) Wei (Wei Zixi) Fu, Xi – Chen Dayu, a painter and contemporary Jiangsu and Zhejiang, Shanghai, Cheng Shifa, Fan Yang, Wu Shanming and other contemporary artists of the main paintings.
Imitation of

Anhui, mainly in the ancient Huizhou Huangshan area, old paintings of the Qing Shanghai and Xinan School of Painting-based, to Distressed level high feature. The Panjiayuan goods is the cheapest price, the lowest level of fake paintings, mainly to attract buyers and tourists line outside the main.
goods

other regions, also has a strong regional, such as Shaanxi licensed to do the artist works in Shi Lu, Zhao Wangyun, Liu Western Guangdong licensed to Gao Jian Fu of the Lingnan School, Gao Qifeng, Li Xiongcai Guanshan masterpieces of Chao Shao-an and Lin Yong, Fang Chuxiong, Prince (Click to see the Prince film and television works fine dance door 2 “) Wu Guangdong contemporary famous works-based. These all over the mainstream, unique, complementary, and ultimately goes to the auction and art market of Beijing, Shanghai and other major cities.