THIEVES have stolen two Stone Age axes in a daylight raid at one of York’s most popular museums.

The prehistoric artefacts, each 15cm long, were stolen from a public “handling” display at Yorkshire Museum earlier this month.

York Museums Trust, which manages the museum, said they would now look at reviewing security at the site at Museum Gardens following the theft.

Trust spokesman Lee Clark said the artefacts were “important” to the museum and appealed to those responsible for stealing the axes to return the items as soon as possible.

He described the thieves as “opportunist”. He said: “The axes were part of the handling collection at the museum, but they were securely fastened to the display.”

He said: “The axes, although not of great financial value, were important to the Trust’s collections and we would like to appeal to the thief to bring them back so they can be once again enjoyed by the public.

“There is no reward for the return of the items, however obviously we are keen to get them back as they are part of Yorkshire’s history.

“York Museums Trust strongly believes in allowing visitors to get their hands on history. However, following this theft, the Trust will do a full review of its handling policy security to make sure such incidents do not happen again.”
Ads by Google

    Expat Living In Canada?

    Do You Have £70K to £1.8m In UK Pensions? Free QROPS Guide!

    Your.QROPSchoices.com/HMRCapproved
    Residence Inn Whitby

    Extended Stay Hotel Rooms & Suites by Marriott. Book Residence Inn.

    Marriott.com/ResidenceInn

The axes, one of which is pictured above, are two of about 2,000 in the Yorkshire Museum’s collection. They are believed to have been stolen on March 7.

Police are working with curators at the museum to look through CCTV footage in an effort to catch those responsible.

A North Yorkshire Police spokeswoman appealed for anyone who was in the museum that day and saw anything suspicious.

Police would also like to speak to anybody with information on the whereabouts of the artefacts. Phone the force on 101, or Crimestoppers anonymously on 0800 555111.

The museum, which was officially opened in February 1830, has four permanent collections covering biology, geology, archaeology and astronomy. 