Heart of St Laurence O'Toole stolen

The preserved heart of the Patron Saint of Dublin, St Laurence O'Toole, has been stolen from Christ Church Cathedral.

A relic of St Laurence O'Toole has been stolen from Christ Church Cathedral.

The preserved heart of Dublin's patron saint, which was kept in a wooden heart-shaped container sealed within a small iron barred box, was believed to be stolen between last night and noon today.

The one time archbishop was born Lorcán Ua Tuathail in Castledermot, Co Kildare in 1128 and died in France in 1180.

His heart has been preserved in Christ Church Cathedral since the 13th century and was a major pilgrimage site in the medieval period.

The Dean of Christ Church Cathedral and the diocese of Dublin and Glendalough, Rev Dermot Dunne said he was devastated that one of the treasured artifacts of the cathedral is stolen.

"It has no economic value but it is a priceless treasure that links our present foundation with its founding father, St Laurence O'Toole."

The Cathedral was opened at 9.30am, to no alarm activation and no sign of any break-in.

The heart was believed to be stolen between last night and noon today.

The Heart of St Laurence O'Toole was kept in a wooden heart shaped container sealed within a small iron barred box.

The one time Archbishop St Laurence O'Toole was born Lorcán Ua Tuathail in Castledermot, Co Kildare in 1128 and known as Laurence O'Toole, died November 1180 in Normandy France.

His heart was preserved in Christ Church Cathedral since the 13th century and has been a major pilgrimage site since the medieval period until the present day.

The Dean of Christ Church Cathedral and the diocese of Dublin and Glendalough, the Most Reverend Dermot Dunne stated "I am devastated that one of the treasured artifacts of the cathedral is stolen.

It has no economic value but it is a priceless treasure that links our present foundation with its founding father, St Laurence O'Toole."

Gardaí wish to speak to anyone who may have visited Saint Lauds Chapel in Christ Church Cathedral between yesterday evening and today at 12.30pm and seen anything unusual or suspicious in the Chapel, Cathedral.