Call to halt sale of 'blood antiques'

The Cambodian Government has asked New York auction house, Sotherby's, not to sell an ancient statue it suspects was looted during the Khmer Rouge era.

The statue was expected to fetch between $US2 million and $US3 million.

It's a warrior in an elaborate headdress about 1.5 metres tall but it was snapped off at the feet from it's stone pedestal.

In Cambodia, authorities say the pedestal and feet remain just as they do for the warrior's twin which is on display at a museum in California.

The US Department of Homeland security has opened an investigation into the case following a request from the Cambodian Government.

Tess Davis, executive director of the Lawyers' Committee for Cultural Heritage Preservation, said she believes Sotherby's is still trying to sell the statue.

"If I were a collector myself I would be very nervous about buying an object who's title was questioned on the front page of the New York Times," Ms Davis said.

She said potential buyers need to understand the scale of the crime.

"A number of American and European museums and auction houses have been caught with illicit, illicit Cambodian antiquities, many of these were taken from Khmer Rouge occupied areas during the countries long conflict, which makes them blood antiquities," she said.

"It's no different to blood diamonds from Sierra Leone."

The Cambodian Government have introduced measures to combat looting, but Ms Davis said the problem is a global one.

"As long as there is a demand for stolen and looted Khmer art there will be looting," she said.

And Ms Davis said while it is often assumed most of the looting is being done by poor villagers, this is not always the case.

"When you look at these vast temple complexes that have literally been taken apart stone by stone and carted over the border to Thailand," she said.

"I mean think about this, this is sandstone blocks we are talking about, weighing hundreds, if not thousands of pounds, that is not being done by poor villagers, that would require money and organisation."

Ms Davis has recently discovered French laws from 1925 which could help Cambodia prove title over looted antiques.