Ten People Killed in Egypt While Digging for Ancient Treasures

An unfortunate manifestation of Egyptomania is the illegal and sometimes deadly trade in Egyptian antiquities

Ten people killed in Egypt while digging for ancient treasures

Ambitions of making money quickly have incited many to turn to illegal archaeological digging, particularly in antiquities-rich locations such as Luxor, Aswan and Cairo.

Ten people were killed when the soil caved in on them as they were illegally digging for ancient treasures under a house in a central Egyptian village, police officials told AFP on Monday.

The 10, including four brothers, were buried alive when the walls of the dig collapsed in the village of Arab al-Manasra, north of the historic city of Luxor.

Rescue services were working to recover the bodies, the official said, adding that two people were also injured in the incident.

Ambitions of making money quickly have incited many to turn to illegal archaeological digging, particularly in antiquities-rich locations such as Luxor, Aswan and Cairo.

“We have to work on many levels to stop these get-rich-quick schemes, where people are digging for an illusion,” Mansur Boreik, head of the Luxor antiquities department told AFP.
Massive looting of archaeological sites in Egypt continues as security forces turn a blind eye to thugs plundering Egypt’s cultural heritage.

 

After Egypt’s revolution, priceless artifacts were stolen from the nation's world-famous Egyptian Museum in Cairo as well as from innumerable storehouses scattered throughout the country.

 

Today the continued plundering of archaeological sites, which comprise Egypt’s cultural heritage in its most pristine state, presents an even more critical challenge as sites are often remote and protected by low-paid guards and state security seems unable or unwilling to halt the mayhem.

 

El Hibeh is one such site. On the east bank of the Nile in a particularly impoverished area of Egypt three hour’s drive south of Cairo, the archaeological site occupies about two square kilometers and includes cemeteries and the ruins of a walled ancient provincial town with a limestone temple, industrial facilities, houses and possible fort and governing residence. The remains date from the late Pharaonic, Graeco-Roman, Coptic and early Islamic periods (approximately 11th century BCE to eighth century CE). Hibeh is of special importance because it is one of very few relatively intact town sites remaining in Egypt and because of its extensive archaeological deposits dating to the Third Intermediate Period, Egypt's last "Dark Age" and an era particularly poorly known archaeologically. 

 

Eminent University of California, Berkeley archaeologist Dr. Carol Redmount arrived in Egypt in February to continue her archaeological work at the site after obtaining the proper permits from Egypt's Supreme Council of Antiquities which controls all excavations in the country.

 

Twenty-four hours before departing for the site her permits were revoked by the provincial police service with no explanation.  Inquiries revealed that a mafia-like gang led by an escaped convicted crminal have been ruthlessly looting the site since at least June 2011.  The Supreme Council of Antiquities has been unable to stop the pillaging despite repeated appeals to local police services.  Open, systematic looting continues on a daily basis as of the writing of this press release.  Dr. Redmount has not been allowed to visit the site nor do any work. 

 

"Hibeh is vitally important to understanding the character of ancient Egypt in the Third Intermediate Period, a very confusing and confused historical era for which only limited archaeological resources exist.  Archaeology is controlled destruction, but looting is obliteration.  It destorys an irreplaceable, nonrenewable cultural resource that belongs to humanity," says Dr. Redmount. 

 

Redmount's team of six researchers from UC Berkeley is currently unable to do any of its proposed accademic program at Hibeh for which they had received permission from the Egyptian authorities.  This is costing the team tens of thousands of dollars in lost grants. 

 

"Our primary concern of course is the incalculable loss of precious archaeological evidence.  Archaeologists dream of excavating undistrubed or even relatively undisturbed historic sites. We are losing Hibeh for posterity as we speak," adds Dr. Redmount. 

 

Independent verification of the scale of the looting has been provided by visitors to the site who sent photos to Dr. Redmount, including pictures of looting in progress.

Below is a press release regarding the El Hibeh looting. Please support the campaign to save this valuable archaeological site and spread the word wherever and however you can. You can use the resources on the Facebook group page (http://www.facebook.com/groups/337119989673652/), including photographs and this release.

Begins…

Massive looting of archaeological sites in Egypt continues as security forces turn a blind eye to thugs plundering Egypt’s cultural heritage.

After Egypt’s revolution, priceless artifacts were stolen from the nation’s world-famous Egyptian Museum in Cairo as well as from innumerable storehouses scattered throughout the country.

Today the continued plundering of archaeological sites, which comprise Egypt’s cultural heritage in its most pristine state, presents an even more critical challenge as sites are often remote and protected by low-paid guards and state security seems unable or unwilling to halt the mayhem.


El Hibeh is one such site. On the east bank of the Nile in a particularly impoverished area of Egypt three hour’s drive south of Cairo, the archaeological site occupies about two square kilometers and includes cemeteries and the ruins of a walled ancient provincial town with a limestone temple, industrial facilities, houses and possible fort and governing residence. The remains date from the late Pharaonic, Graeco-Roman, Coptic and early Islamic periods (approximately 11th century BCE to eighth century CE). Hibeh is of special importance because it is one of very few relatively intact town sites remaining in Egypt and because of its extensive archaeological deposits dating to the Third Intermediate Period, Egypt’s last “Dark Age” and an era particularly poorly known archaeologically.

Eminent University of California, Berkeley archaeologist Dr. Carol Redmount arrived in Egypt in February to continue her archaeological work at the site after obtaining the proper permits from Egypt’s Supreme Council of Antiquities which controls all excavations in the country.

Twenty-four hours before departing for the site her permits were revoked by the provincial police service with no explanation. Inquiries revealed that a mafia-like gang led by an escaped convicted criminal have been ruthlessly looting the site since at least June 2011. The Supreme Council of Antiquities has been unable to stop the pillaging despite repeated appeals to local police services. Open, systematic looting continues on a daily basis as of the writing of this press release. Dr. Redmount has not been allowed to visit the site nor do any work.

“Hibeh is vitally important to understanding the character of ancient Egypt in the Third Intermediate Period, a very confusing and confused historical era for which only limited archaeological resources exist. Archaeology is controlled destruction, but looting is obliteration. It destroys an irreplaceable, nonrenewable cultural resource that belongs to humanity,” says Dr. Redmount.

Tomb with a beautiful uraeus frieze opened by looters and all contents destroyed

Redmount’s team of six researchers from UC Berkeley is currently unable to do any of its proposed academic program at Hibeh for which they had received permission from the Egyptian authorities. This is costing the team tens of thousands of dollars in lost grants.

“Our primary concern of course is the incalculable loss of precious archaeological evidence. Archaeologists dream of excavating undistrubed or even relatively undisturbed historic sites. We are losing Hibeh for posterity as we speak,” adds Dr. Redmount.

Independent verification of the scale of the looting has been provided by visitors to the site who sent photos to Dr. Redmount, including pictures of looting in progress.

While those associated with the Facebook group working to apply pressure and get some protection for El Hibeh continue to pursue a variety of strategies, it seems the level of destruction continues to mount.

Graphic explaining why El Hibeh is important

Today, 15th March, Egypt’s El Wafd weeekly newspaper had a large article drawing attention to the problems. The article is in Arabic and accompanied by pictures which show even further damage to some of the areas photographed earlier in March. The reporter, Magdy Salama, travelled to El Hibeh a few days ago to find no security at the site, walked everywhere and took lots of pictures, some of which can be seen in the article. The article has been scanned and can be seen here http://www.facebook.com/photo.php?fbid=10150684079459354&set=oa.340152236037094&type=1&theater. A translation will hopefully soon be available.

El Wafd newspaper article

Reporter Magdy Salama's article with picture of him holding human remains exposed by looters in recent days.

Also for Arabic readers there’s another article published expressing support for inspectors at El Hibeh.


A petition has been established calling for protection of Egypt’s archaeological sites. Please sign and share – 5000 signatures are needed.


It is also hoped to get Google Earth to update their images of the area and everyone is encouraged to mark El Hibeh in the hope that if enough people do so, Google Earth will get some new images. These will be very valuable in tracking the extent of the looting. The image below is taken at night.

El Hibeh satellite image

This is a satellite view of El Hibeh taken several years ago. Compare it with the most recent Google earth view of the site. Google has three satellite images taken in different years. The most recent is after the looting. Although it was taken at night, you can still see the looting pits in the reflected light of the desert and the town wall.

We may be able to get Google Earth to update the Hibeh images and show it currently and in daylight. Go to this link, https://followyourworld.appspot.com/, type in Al Hibah, Egypt for the location. It will take you to a small village just south of the mound. Move the picture a bit to the north until you see a perfectly square enclosure. 