Raiders of Egypt

THE WORLD CULTURAL AND IDEAS

Sitting on the edge of the Nile, Ilka Klose contemplate with equanimity the evening falling on his excavations at Elephantine Island, south of Egypt . Across the river, the desert bronze Aswan deploys her curves bursting with unexplored tombs. The feluccas absconding, ibises fly, a peace pervades the landscape. A deceptive calm. Ilka is nestled deep in his wicker chair: "When night falls, the dune is invaded by treasure seekers s," said the young German archaeologist placidly by unfolding the paper to a caramel.

At a thousand miles from Tahrir Square, the Egyptian revolution had only a distant echo. Fifteen days of the uprising that made ??tremble Cairo were not due to the Governor, yet controversial, the province of Upper Egypt . But it awakened the hopes of a motley crowd of grave robbers and traffickers who, for a year, throng the "dome of the winds", a rocky hill that houses the tombs of dignitaries of the Old Kingdom and Roman burials.

"Since the revolution, people dig like crazy on the western bank of Aswan, confirms Kelany Adel , inspector of the Supreme Council of Antiquities of Egypt (CSA). Traffickers professionals, but also ordinary people. They go crazy when they find a tomb, it's full of mummies! In the old Aswan, they dig tunnels in their homes than nine meters long ... in the granite. In most cases, they find nothing, some pottery, but that's a lot of deaths (due to various accidents because it is work done by amateurs with no experience) and damage: while digging their tunnels, they destroy the inscriptions engraved in stone. "

Certainly, the looters had moderate their ambitions. Ten days after the fall of Hosni Mubarak , in February 2011, it was still possible, in Aswan, to look to snatch a career of a pink granite statue of Ramses II of 160 tons and six meters high in shots jackhammer. At Saqqara, bas-reliefs were cut with a saw. Large sites of Luxor and Aswan have escaped the robbers. But in remote areas, many graves and archaeological stores were looted by construction workers, particularly in northern Egypt. At Giza, Saqqara, Dahshur, Abusir, Kafr El-Sheikh , in Beheira in the Nile Delta, Sinai, Alexandria, Ismailia, Sharqiya and Abydos, the nocturnal looting have increased. Which is a lot ...

Even the many museums of Cairo were not spared: "During the revolution, they sold trinkets and furniture from national historical museums on the sidewalk for 30 or 40 pounds (less than 4 and 5 euros), laments Christian Leblanc famous French archaeologist in charge of the construction site of the Ramesseum, in Luxor. Fortunately, the Egyptians cultivated bought these heritage assets for return to the Supreme Council of forces arm ed. "

More than a year after the revolution, inventory theft and destruction is incomplete. And while many sites have resumed, Egypt still faces major problems of site safety. Many inspectors are unable to defend their stores and secure areas they discover. To try to stop the traffic, the Council International Council of Museums (ICOM) in Paris has just published an "Emergency Red List of Cultural Property endangered Egyptian". For now, only one type of endangered objects (statues, vases, objects of daily life) was set so that the customs have the eye. But a list of "100 to 300 specific objects" listed, is in preparation, explains Julien Anfruns , Director of ICOM.

This is a list of all its concerns, directly related to the upheavals of the Egyptian revolution: "There are robberies and looting in the museums themselves, and on the sites, because of security. Then number of officials resign by lack of resources. And there is the lack of money related to the 80% drop in tourism since a year. "An example: the 15 dollars (more than 11 euros) that costs a tourist visa, $ 2 are taken for finance sites and museums of Nubia in Aswan particular. " You can imagine the waste of money! "worries Anfruns Julien.

One of the problems that now threaten archaeological sites is the proliferation of illegal construction, which bloom to the foot of the pyramids, as at Saqqara. It is also the case in Aswan, where, opposite the cemetery Fatimid Adel Kelany oversees somehow excavations on land wedged between a residential area and the garage of a constructor property . Squatting on a big rock that emerges from the mud in the middle of the trucks and cranes, he laboriously trying to decipher ancient inscriptions in the noise of vehicles coming and going.

"After the revolution, people began to build without a permit in the archaeological area, tells the inspector to the Supreme Council of Antiquities. Before, when this happened, we would find the font , but now there are more. Sometimes the Supreme Council of Antiquities has sent us two guards, but what do you do with two guards? We even tried we steal the stones of the wall to protect the site! And yet, we are not the most annoyed: in the yard next door, a guy comes armed every two hours threaten the mission and sell pieces of land excavation that does not belong to him. Last year, I requested that the city of Aswan is protected as archaeological area. I await the decision. But for the government, the exploitation of quarries of granite has earned much more money than the excavations that we lead. "

Realtors improvised, greedy developers, farmers, poorly housed, traders: a cohort cumbersome came complicate the work of archaeologists and their relationship with the population. Experts agree to see these acts in the lack of awareness of some Egyptians vis-à-vis the archaeological heritage. "There were no flights that says Christian Leblanc . But also a lot of looting and vandalism. "At the Cairo Museum, 70 objects were damaged or destroyed. At Tell el-Maskhuta, near Ismailia, the tomb of Ken-Amun (nineteenth dynasty) was destroyed, as that of Impy on the plateau of Giza. Conversely, many sites, such as the Ramesseum at Luxor , were protected by the population and local authorities.

To understand the ambiguous qu'entretiennent the Egyptians with their heritage and with archaeologists, some do not hesitate to put into question the political culture of the Mubarak regime. "Over the two decades preceding the revolution, the monuments of Ancient Egypt was transformed into commodities to attract the foreign tourists from around the world. This process has given many Egyptians feel that their heritage was not explained to them and I believe much of this vandalism " , said Megan Rowland, a graduate in philosophy of archeology at Cambridge University, England.

The arrival in 2002, the famous and controversial Zahi Hawass - it was sometimes called Indiana Jones - head of the Supreme Council of Antiquities of Egypt has promoted the idea of a reappropriation by the Egyptians of their heritage, to Sometimes the expense of foreign missions, but without involving local residents and interest in the management of archaeological sites. Besides a series of sensational claims of restitution of works, notably addressed to France and to Germany , Zahi Hawass is certainly pass a law in February 2010 setting aside the 10% quota of goods that foreign missions were used to deduct from their discoveries. But his authoritarian and opaque management has mainly been aimed at raising international funds at the cost of operations shows that exacerbated the misunderstanding with the local people.

"Zahi Hawass embodied the idea that the Egyptians control their assets, says Mohamed El-Shahed , a doctoral student at the University of New York and a specialist in Egyptian architecture. But this control has resulted in a security policy, which resulted actually to remove the population of Antiquities for the benefit of tourists. "From north to south, residents of archaeological sites keep a memory of bitter aggression and megalomania of Zahi Hawass. The latter, for example, drove the camel in Giza, charged by him to "turn the pyramids into a zoo." On the hill of Qurna, Luxor, the expulsion in 2005 of 20 000 inhabitants and the destruction of their ancestral homes on the grounds they were built on graves has traumatized the population, some of which tried to reinstall the site after the revolution.

Between 2009 and 2010, the authorities have also built a wall around the archaeological area of Malqatta, in Luxor, to push the farmers who gradually nibbled the site of the palace of Amenhotep III. Unscrupulous, they walled up the village and palm grove, which for centuries were intimately mixed with the ruins and gave the place unique. "Initially the project was to build small, simple stone walls with a metal railing, says Christian Leblanc, and it turned into a concrete wall two to three meters high; an ugly monstrosity that an exceptional landscape, removes a magnificent panorama and cost a fortune. "

One year after the revolution, the Egyptians did not finish to discover the damage caused by the management of the old regime. In May 2011, the Director of the Department of Archaeology at Cairo University, Azza Farouq , fell face to face with 3,000 rooms, unregistered, hidden in the museum toilets of the faculty: "They were there for the year 1980. The museum director was not aware, he told me that they were irrelevant parts. After checking, it turned out they were valuable. "But the ruins and Antiques are not the only victims of the upheavals that shook the country. In Egypt a full cultural revolution, a new generation of archaeologists, activists and intellectuals criticized the "graybeards" of the Supreme Council of Antiquities, and seeks to reclaim a heritage that for centuries feeds the fantasies of power and the interest of foreign powers.

Seated at a cafe in Cairo, Ahmed Abd El-Halim and Ahmed Sharaawy jubilant. Revolution is a golden opportunity for them to take their revenge. Just three days after the fall of Mubarak, they founded the Coalition of archaeologists free to expose corruption of the Supreme Council of Antiquities in Egypt, the discrimination they believe have been victims for years, and the inequality of their conditions Working in comparison with foreign archaeologists. "For ten years, the regime has alienated Egyptian archaeologists sites. On leaving college, we had no opportunity to work in the field. Most of us ended up scratching paper in an office or in safety, without contact with archeology. And even those positions, they had to buy or find a plunger. The CSA was riddled with corruption. Most government officials purchased their position and boosted their relatives. Since 1999 they have not hired a single Egyptian archaeologist, only those who were close to Zahi Hawass did make it. And when we were offered an inspector, it was a contract precarious paid a pittance: £ 500 monthly (63 euros). "

After the revolution, the Supreme Council was bombarded with complaints by employees requesting hires, permanent contracts and a salary increase. Nearly 20,000 inspectors have demanded their tenure. Given the scale of mobilization, the institution with the aging leadership was faced with a crisis unprecedented financial and administrative. The four directors who have succeeded since the departure of Zahi Hawass, in June 2011, failed to reduce the debt of the house. Especially since the country is hard fall in tourism revenues. Forced to borrow , the CSA should more than £ 1 billion to the government to pay the salaries of its bloated. On its 50,000 employees, many have no attribution.

What cool the ambitions of young Egyptian archaeologists, poorly armed against the knowledge of their foreign colleagues. "There is a big deal of training, said Khaled El-Enany, professor at Helwan University (Cairo suburb) and researcher at the French Institute of Oriental Archaeology (IFAO). For an Egyptian, do a PhD in archeology is very difficult for economic reasons. and all sources are in foreign languages. More than nine out of ten articles are in English or German. Egyptians must take courses in "French archaeological" to be at! The central problem is that it does not exist in Egypt Research Institute of Egyptology, such as the CNRS in France . status "in Egyptology researcher" does not exist. At best, you can find a teacher, inspector or photographer site. But you can not compare the level of a full-time researcher with that of a teacher giving fifteen hours per week. What is needed is to create an institute where the Egyptian and foreign Egyptologists can work together. To counter the speech of some contemptuous Western colleagues, we must give more resources and training Egyptian researchers. "

Humiliating consequences of this are known: the 63 tombs discovered in the Valley of the Kings, none was unearthed by an Egyptian team. The latest, in January, was unearthed by a team of Swiss . Sensitive to this injustice and troubled by the inability of teachers to answer questions from schoolchildren who were visiting his site on the Ramesseum, Christian Leblanc, in collaboration with Egyptian Egyptologists, publishes a comprehensive collection of educational inserts distributed to children. In office for forty years, looks forward to the French end of the period of political transition. The first government from the ranks of Parliament will he favorable to foreign missions? He will remain open to international collaborations or he will adopt a nationalist approach to wealth management? "Certainly, Zahi Hawass went against some hints of neo-colonial foreign archaeologists, says Christian Leblanc. His word of order was: Egypt to the Egyptians. If there is anything wrong on this point, he did not realize, however, that many foreign missions do a great job of conservation and value, without counting the share devoted to training. the Ramesseum, we employ 180 workers in 10 acres of excavation and participate, for years, mentoring young Egyptian researchers. Zahi Hawass's speech was completely offset from reality. The Egyptian heritage is not just national: it is the history of mankind. But I am confident that young people who come after him will be more moderate if we have the desire to instill a true partnership taking address their needs. "

Today, an Islamist threat to the archaeological heritage is widely scanned. Statements of Sheikh Salafi Abdel Moneim Al-Shehat, who claimed to cover sheets of wax or antique statues, were disowned by his own party (Al-Nur). At most Salafists confine themselves to emphasize that the ruins are not a priority. "The fact that people vote Islamist in tourist areas shows that the Islamists are not perceived as a threat to the antiquities," said, Confident Ahmed Abd El-Halim, one of the founders of Egyptian Archaeologists free. Throughout Egypt, the zeal with which the young revolutionaries seized the pharaonic reference is unprecedented in history. Hope it resonates with a creative breath reflects renewed attention to heritage. The figures of Pharaoh, as the obelisk monuments are diverted for criticism against the military regime. On the first anniversary of the revolution, January 25, revolutionaries presented, Tahrir Square, a wooden obelisk 40 meters high, decorated with the names of martyrs killed by the army since the uprising began.

Faced with ancient figures valued by the old regime since Nasser as King Menes, the architect of the unification of the kingdom three millennia before the Christian era, it is now that of Maat, goddess of harmony and social policy, that is represented as presiding over the destinies of the revolution. 