Our view: Be advocates for saving our heritage artifacts

March is Archaeology Month and, the timing is excellent to educate the public to its role in the protection of our history that is below ground and underwater.

The Florida Public Archaeology Network, Northeast Regional Center, is holding a workshop featuring experts in the field of archaeology Wednesday at City Hall. In addition to the Florida Public Archaeology Network, presenters will include the St. Augustine City Archaeology Program, St. Augustine Lighthouse and LAMP, St. Johns County Environmental Division, and St. Augustine Archaeology Association, in close partnership with members of Florida Anthropological Society, Florida Archaeological Council, and Society for Historical Archaeology. It’s an impressive array of knowledgeable people on this topic.

Their goal is to help our citizens become advocates for the heritage sites and the artifacts collected from them. In recent weeks, the city’s heritage has been threatened, and perhaps damaged forever, by treasure hunters and reality TV programs where artifacts become bounty in negotiations with land owners willing to sell these treasures to private interests.

The issue of digging historic sites for other than a public purpose has caused a stir on both sides: Property rights versus protection of a community’s history through its artifacts. While no one can tell a private land owner what he/she can do with their land or its contents, it is sad that some of our story is lost forever in these type of arrangements.

Sarah Miller, director/public archaeologist for the local center, said the workshop will help the public learn more about archaeology beyond just the digging of artifacts. There are also legal issues to consider when people dig. Then too, ethical and emotional considerations arise before, during and after a dig. Sometimes those make as powerful an impact as just the dig and the artifacts that come out of the ground. For example, a Native American site may also contain human remains which create serious ethical and emotional issues.

St. Augustine-St. Johns County has been a treasure hunter’s paradise for years because it is the nation’s oldest city, founded by the Spanish in 1565. A recent article in The Record showed the host of a reality show holding a large piece of gold that he said was found in a local back yard. While this is perhaps a nice find for the property owner, who likely will get compensated well by the TV show, it is disappointing that this treasure will not be evaluated in the context of the city’s history or, put on display locally for all to see.

We need to be advocates for the city’s history through the protection of these objects for the generations who will follow us. How will they know our history without these artifacts?

We encourage your attendance at this workshop. The room seats 100 and there is no excuse not to be there, if you support preserving our long history.