El Hibeh – take action update

If you are disturbed and horrified by the looting of Egypt and the world’s treasures from sites like El Hibeh, there are ways you can help take action.

1. Sign the petition

A petition has been set up online – it’s easy to sign and just takes about a minute maximum. PLEASE sign and share!

2. Join the Facebook Group

The group shares pictures of the site, of looting, articles regarding this issue, and it is hoped that after joining you will spread the word, add friends to the group, and notify the press when and where possible. We must take action to save El Hibeh and hundreds of other sites like it that have been severely damaged as a result of limited police protection since January 28, 2011.

3. Share the group and invite others to join

4. If you’re on Twitter, share the group and posts – use hashtags #ElHibeh and #looting

5. Send some emails

The following paragraph can be cut and pasted into emails and sent to organisations and contact (see below for suggestions). We suggest that you put El Hibeh and Looting in the subject line.

I am appalled at the looting that is currently occurring at the ancient Egyptian site of El Hibeh as well as in numerous other places across Egypt. These sites represent the cultural heritage of Egypt and the world. It is imperative that looting be stopped immediately and that security is re-established and maintained. We urge you to take all necessary actions to make this happen.

Concerned,

You may wish to add points about the importance of tourism, the image of the country, etc. 

El Hibeh destruction continues

While those associated with the Facebook group working to apply pressure and get some protection for El Hibeh continue to pursue a variety of strategies, it seems the level of destruction continues to mount.Today, 15th March, Egypt’s El Wafd weeekly newspaper had a large article drawing attention to the problems. The article is in Arabic and accompanied by pictures which show even further damage to some of the areas photographed earlier in March. The reporter, Magdy Salama, travelled to El Hibeh a few days ago to find no security at the site, walked everywhere and took lots of pictures, some of which can be seen in the article.Also for Arabic readers there’s another article published expressing support for inspectors at El Hibeh.A petition has been established calling for protection of Egypt’s archaeological sites. Please sign and share – 5000 signatures are needed.It is also hoped to get Google Earth to update their images of the area and everyone is encouraged to mark El Hibeh in the hope that if enough people do so, Google Earth will get some new images. These will be very valuable in tracking the extent of the looting.