Stolen Museum Items Found in Unattended Black Bag at Train Station

fouritems240 Stolen Museum Items Found in Unattended Black Bag at Train Station

Four more stolen items returned

More good news comes from the website of Dr Zahi Hawass today with the return of four more items that were stolen from the Egyptian Museum on the 29th of January.

The recently recovered items are as follows:

    Gilded wooden statue
    Royal Fan
    Shabti of Yuya and Thuya
    Bronze Trumpet

Hawass describes the condition of the pieces:

    The objects returned include the gilded wooden statue of Tutankhamun standing in a boat throwing a harpoon (JE 60710.1). The statue suffered slight damage; a small part of the crown is missing as well as pieces of the legs. The boat is still in the Museum, and the figure of the king will be reunited with it and restored.

    The second returned object is one of the 10 missing shabtis of Yuya and Tjuya (JE 68984). It is still in very good condition; it does not require restoration and will be placed on display again immediately, stated Dr. Tarek El-Awady, Director of the Egyptian Museum.

    The third object is the gilded bronze and wooden trumpet of Tutankhamun (JE 62008). It was also received in excellent condition and will be put on display immediately.

    Also returned was a part of Tutankhamun’s fan. One face is in good condition while the other has been broken into 11 pieces. Part of the royal fan JE 62006 still missing. 

Dr Zahi Hawass doesn’t make any mention on his website about how these items were returned.

Ahram Online provides more details. It describes how an employee of the Ministry of State for Antiquities Affairs (MSAA) brought them in on his way to work:

    Salah Abdel Salam, a public relation personal at the MSAA, came upon these objects during his daily trip to work on the Metro. He related that he accidently found an unidentified black bag placed on a chair in the Shubra Metro station. Doubtful that the bag was concealing an explosive, Salah opened it and found the Tutankhamun statue gazing up at him. He took the bag and handed it over to the MSAA.

What made Salah so sure that the unattended black bag didn’t contain a bomb?

Why did he go through the contents of the unattended bag?

Would it not be more proper to hand the bag into authorities instead so that it could be returned to it’s owner?

Hawass called on the Egyptian people to keep handing in any of the remaining stolen items, adding that they won’t be penalised, instead, they will be compensated:

    “If anyone is afraid of handing over such objects they can put it at the MSAA entrance gate or the Egyptian Museum’s door and we will take care of them,” 

Another odd but interesting addition to the story are the comments made by Egyptologist Hala Hassan, who is the curator of the Tutankhamun collection at the Egyptian Museum. He claims that the trumpet has magical abilities:

    According to Hassan, whenever someone blows into it a war occurs. A week before the revolution, during a documenting and photographing process, one of the museum’s staff had blown into it and a week after revolution broke out. The same thing had happened before the 1967 war and prior to the 1991 gulf war, when a student was doing a comprehensive research on Tutankhamun’s collection. 



Hawass also said that because current laws have not allowed guards at Egypt’s antiquities sites to be armed they have not been able to stop gangs of armed looters. Now a new armed security department will be established at the sites and museums to provide better protection.

In related news, Zahi Hawass is expected to attend court this Sunday over his involvement in the corruption related to the opening of the Egyptian Museum Gift Shop.