Archaeology ‘trial of the century’ ends in acquittal of accused forger James ossuary

After 7-year saga, a surprising end to antiquities fraud case

A trial that touched on archaeology, chemistry, Bible studies and criminal law ended in the acquittal of accused forger Oded Golan

The Jehoash tablet was one of the famous artifacts Oded Golan was accused, and acquitted, of forging.

An Israeli collector accused of antiquities fraud was acquitted Wednesday in a packed Jerusalem courtroom after a trial that lasted seven years — a stunning reversal for the prosecution and a victory for a defendant maligned as an arch-forger who falsified history for personal gain.

Oded Golan had been charged with faking biblical artifacts, including the “James ossuary” –  a stone box bearing an inscription identifying it as containing the bones of James, brother of Jesus. The ossuary became an international sensation a decade ago after it was hailed by some scholars as the first physical evidence for the existence of Jesus.

Golan was also accused of forging a second famous piece, the so-called “Jehoash tablet,” with an inscription supporting the biblical narrative about the Temple in Jerusalem.

The judge, Aharon Farkash, acquitted Golan of all charges of forgery and fraud. He convicted the collector only of lesser charges of selling antiquities without a permit and possession of items suspected to be stolen. A co-defendant, antiquities dealer Robert Deutsch, was acquitted of all charges.

Reflecting the unique nature of the case against Golan, the ruling in Jerusalem’s District Court mentioned not only criminal law but 9th-century Phoenician script, isotopes, Egyptian hieroglyphics, ancient kings of Judaea, and Jesus of Nazareth.

In his decision, the judge was careful to say his acquittal of Golan did not mean the artifacts were necessarily genuine, only that the prosecution had failed to prove beyond a reasonable doubt that Golan had faked them.

Oded Golan speaks to reporters after his acquittal Wednesday in Jerusalem's District Court (photo credit: AP Photo/Sebastian Scheiner)

Oded Golan speaks to reporters after his acquittal Wednesday in Jerusalem's District Court (photo credit: AP Photo/Sebastian Scheiner)

The legal saga began in 2004 with Golan’s indictment and with accusations from the government’s Israel Antiquities Authority that he ran a sophisticated forgery ring that had succeeded in planting fakes in museums worldwide. The Antiquities Authority’s director said at the time that the original indictment was “the tip of the iceberg,” and police promised more suspects would be charged.

As Farkash read his ruling Wednesday, it became clear that nearly nothing of the state’s case remained.

The judge took Golan to task for giving different accounts to authorities at different times, saying he “tried to create facts that were convenient for him.” But the judge ruled that the prosecution had failed to prove Golan had faked the ossuary, the tablet, or any of the other artifacts included in the indictment.

He said police had badly bungled a forensic check of the famous ossuary and might have contaminated the Aramaic inscription, making it impossible to reach a clear conclusion about whether the words “brother of Jesus” had been forged as the prosecution alleged.

The 'James ossuary,' one of the pieces at the center of Golan's forgery trial, had been hailed by some scholars as the first physical proof for the existence of Jesus (photo credit: AP Photo/Biblical Archaeology Review)

The 'James ossuary,' one of the pieces at the center of Golan's forgery trial, had been hailed by some scholars as the first physical proof for the existence of Jesus (photo credit: AP Photo/Biblical Archaeology Review)

The trial stretched over more than 100 hearings and 12,000 pages of transcripts. It involved policemen, scientists, archaeologists, a photography expert and one of Golan’s ex-girlfriends, who testified that she remembered seeing the ossuary and its inscription in Golan’s parents’ house when they dated in the 1970s – testimony that, if true, meant the inscription could not be a recent forgery.

At one point there was a lengthy discussion of the amount of local rainfall in Roman times: This was relevant to determining if the chemical makeup of a film of dirt covering the ossuary’s inscription was genuine or forged.

“It is not every day,” the judge wrote in his decision, “that a court hears a case involving as many topics as this one: archaeology, history, Bible, chemistry, geology, linguistics and more. Testimony was heard on subjects never before discussed or ruled on in court.”

His ruling was 475 pages long.

“I am very happy that I was fully and completely acquitted of all of the serious charges against me,” Golan, an elfin man with a shock of dark hair, said outside the courtroom. He described himself as an honest collector persecuted by the government and described the case against him as a “balloon” created by the Israel Antiquities Authority. “This balloon just popped,” he said.

The Antiquities Authority said in a statement that it “respected” the ruling.

“The Antiquities Authority will continue to fight those who steal or forge antiquities in order to ensure that the historical truth of the three religions is preserved for future generations,” the statement said.

Israeli court clears 2 of antiquities fraud

Israeli antiquities collector Oded Golan, left, stands in court in Jerusalem, Wednesday, March 13, 2012. An Israeli court has acquitted two men accused of forging a trove of Bible-era artifacts, including the purported burial box of Jesus' brother James. The Jerusalem District Court said Wednesday the defendants' guilt could not be proven beyond a reasonable doubt. The court said the acquittal was not a ruling about whether the relics were authentic or forged.

A Jerusalem court on Wednesday acquitted an Israeli collector of forging a trove of Bible-era artifacts but failed to determine whether a purported burial box of Jesus' brother James at the center of the seven-year trial was authentic or a fake.

The question has confounded biblical archaeologists for almost a decade.

The defendant, collector Oded Golan, had first brought the burial box, or ossuary, to the world's attention in 2002. The box was hailed at the time as the first artifact directly connected to Jesus, but the Israel Antiquities Authority later said it was forged.

An investigation began in 2003 and Golan was charged in 2004 with leading an international forgery ring to create phony biblical artifacts. The trial began in 2005. Golan was in detention for about a month during the initial investigation and then placed under house arrest for nearly two years.

The media are given a preview of The James Ossuary on display at the Royal Ontario Museum. Nov.14.2002 - The media are given a preview of The James Ossuary on display at the Royal Ontario Museum. Nov.14.2002 | Fred Lum/The Globe and Mail

Antiquities collector acquitted of forgery charges in ‘James ossuary’ case

A Roman-era burial box inscribed “James, son of Joseph, brother of Jesus” was reprieved from the scrapheap of history on Wednesday when a Jerusalem judge completely exonerated an Israeli antiquities collector who had been accused of forging it.

The verdict, delivered by Judge Aharon Farkash in a tiny, crowded courtroom in the Jerusalem District Courthouse, ended a seven-year ordeal for the accused, Oded Golan, 60, but it will do little to extinguish the decade-long scientific controversy over the authenticity of the limestone box which has raged since it was first displayed to the public at the Royal Ontario Museum in 2002.

    Judge set to lift lid on ‘James ossuary' verdict
    Notable gaffes involving art and artifacts
    Has film crew found the DNA of Jesus?

If genuine, the burial box, or ossuary, is the first physical artifact yet discovered that might be connected with the family of the historical Jesus Christ.

Mr. Golan had been accused of adding the second half of the inscription linking it to Jesus, and then fabricating the patina, the bio-organic coating that adheres to ancient objects, to pass it off as genuine.

But Judge Farkash said the prosecution had failed to prove any of the serious charges against Mr. Golan and acquitted him on all but three minor charges of illegal antiquities dealing and possession of stolen antiquities. Robert Deutsch, a co-defendant, was acquitted on all charges.

“The prosecution failed to prove beyond all reasonable doubt what was stated in the indictment: that the ossuary is a forgery and that Mr. Golan or someone acting on his behalf forged it,” Judge Farkash told the court, summarizing his 475-page verdict.

He noted that it was the first time a criminal court had been asked to rule in a case of antiquities forgery.

The spectacular collapse of the trial, nine years after Mr. Golan was arrested and thousands of items were seized from his home, office and warehouses in Tel Aviv, was a severe blow to the Israeli police and Israel Antiquities Authority, who claimed they had exposed “the tip of the iceberg” of an international conspiracy selling fake artifacts to collectors and museums worldwide.

The verdict will be welcomed by those who hope that the ossuary will finally provide a physical connection to the historical Jesus.

But Judge Farkash, who said he had heard from 126 witnesses and sat through 120 sessions that produced more than 12,000 pages of testimony, acknowledged that the collapse of the criminal trial did not signal the end of the scientific debate over the authenticity of the ossuary.

“This is not to say that the inscription on the ossuary is true and authentic and was written 2,000 years ago,” he said. “We can expect this matter to continue to be researched in the archaeological and scientific worlds and only the future will tell. Moreover, it has not been proved in any way that the words ‘brother of Jesus’ definitely refer to the Jesus who appears in Christian writings.’

Judge Farkash was particularly scathing about tests carried out by the Israel police forensics laboratory that he said had probably contaminated the ossuary, making it impossible to carry out further scientific tests on the inscription.

Mr. Golan, who was accompanied to court by his elderly parents, said he was “delighted at the complete and total acquittal I have received here today.”

“We brought experts from all over the world who testified that the inscriptions on the items that were suspected of being fakes are completely authentic, following research work by dozens of experts,” he said.

Prosecutor Dan Bahat said the case had been complicated by the refusal of a key witness, who was suspected of helping to forge many of the items, to come from Egypt to testify.

“What we tried to do here has set an international precedent,” said Mr. Bahat. “This is the first time someone has brought the issue of antiquities forgery before a court. Regarding at least one object, a decanter, the court found it was fake.”