Wholesale looting at El Hibeh, Egypt

Dear friends, former students, and concerned world citizens: Archaeological sites throughout Egypt are currently being heavily looted, including the critical site of El Hibeh about 3 hours south of Cairo. Once these sites are gone, they are lost forever. It is a non-renewable resource. El Hibeh is of particular importance as it is one of the least disturbed city mounds of the Third Intermediate Period. It was first built probably in 1070 BCE by the High Priests of Amun at Luxor/Thebes and then more or less continually occupied for over 1,700 years so that the site also includes important remains from the Pharaonic, Ptolemaic, Roman, Coptic, and early Islamic periods. We are posting here pictures of the site, of looting, of articles regarding this issue, and hope that you will spread the word, add friends to the group, and notify the press when and where possible. We must take action to save El Hibeh and hundreds of other sites like it that have been severely damaged as a result of limited police protection since January 28, 2011.

Our last excavation season at Hibeh was 2009. For various reasons we were delayed returning until now. After the January 2011 revolution I contacted people, mostly to make sure they were okay, but also to find out about the site as I had heard stories of much looting. And in fact I was told that the site was "very bad." I didn't know what that meant until I was sent pictures taken in May by a group that had visited the site and were so appalled they took the trouble to look up who was doing fieldwork there. I was sent additional pictures of the looting in June, December and January 2012. I had heard that there was still looting going on at night, by someone from El Ogra, the village north of the tell, and that no one could catch the person. That's where things stood when I came to Egypt in February.

Massive looting of archaeological sites in Egypt continues as security forces turn a blind eye to thugs plundering Egypt’s cultural heritage.

 

After Egypt’s revolution, priceless artifacts were stolen from the nation's world-famous Egyptian Museum in Cairo as well as from innumerable storehouses scattered throughout the country.

 

Today the continued plundering of archaeological sites, which comprise Egypt’s cultural heritage in its most pristine state, presents an even more critical challenge as sites are often remote and protected by low-paid guards and state security seems unable or unwilling to halt the mayhem.

 

El Hibeh is one such site. On the east bank of the Nile in a particularly impoverished area of Egypt three hour’s drive south of Cairo, the archaeological site occupies about two square kilometers and includes cemeteries and the ruins of a walled ancient provincial town with a limestone temple, industrial facilities, houses and possible fort and governing residence. The remains date from the late Pharaonic, Graeco-Roman, Coptic and early Islamic periods (approximately 11th century BCE to eighth century CE). Hibeh is of special importance because it is one of very few relatively intact town sites remaining in Egypt and because of its extensive archaeological deposits dating to the Third Intermediate Period, Egypt's last "Dark Age" and an era particularly poorly known archaeologically. 

 

Eminent University of California, Berkeley archaeologist Dr. Carol Redmount arrived in Egypt in February to continue her archaeological work at the site after obtaining the proper permits from Egypt's Supreme Council of Antiquities which controls all excavations in the country.

 

Twenty-four hours before departing for the site her permits were revoked by the provincial police service with no explanation.  Inquiries revealed that a mafia-like gang led by an escaped convicted crminal have been ruthlessly looting the site since at least June 2011.  The Supreme Council of Antiquities has been unable to stop the pillaging despite repeated appeals to local police services.  Open, systematic looting continues on a daily basis as of the writing of this press release.  Dr. Redmount has not been allowed to visit the site nor do any work. 

 

"Hibeh is vitally important to understanding the character of ancient Egypt in the Third Intermediate Period, a very confusing and confused historical era for which only limited archaeological resources exist.  Archaeology is controlled destruction, but looting is obliteration.  It destorys an irreplaceable, nonrenewable cultural resource that belongs to humanity," says Dr. Redmount. 

 

Redmount's team of six researchers from UC Berkeley is currently unable to do any of its proposed accademic program at Hibeh for which they had received permission from the Egyptian authorities.  This is costing the team tens of thousands of dollars in lost grants. 

 

"Our primary concern of course is the incalculable loss of precious archaeological evidence.  Archaeologists dream of excavating undistrubed or even relatively undisturbed historic sites. We are losing Hibeh for posterity as we speak," adds Dr. Redmount. 

 

Independent verification of the scale of the looting has been provided by visitors to the site who sent photos to Dr. Redmount, including pictures of looting in progress.

Ten people killed in Egypt while digging for ancient treasures

Ten people were killed when the soil caved in on them as they were illegally digging for ancient treasures under a house in a central Egyptian village, police officials told AFP on Monday.

The 10, including four brothers, were buried alive when the walls of the dig collapsed in the village of Arab al-Manasra, north of the historic city of Luxor.

Rescue services were working to recover the bodies, the official said, adding that two people were also injured in the incident.

Ambitions of making money quickly have incited many to turn to illegal archaeological digging, particularly in antiquities-rich locations such as Luxor, Aswan and Cairo.

“We have to work on many levels to stop these get-rich-quick schemes, where people are digging for an illusion,” Mansur Boreik, head of the Luxor antiquities department told AFP.

Ten people were killed when the soil caved in on them as they were illegally digging for ancient treasures under a house in a central Egyptian village, police officials told AFP on Monday.

The 10, including four brothers, were buried alive when the walls of the dig collapsed in the village of Arab al-Manasra, north of the historic city of Luxor.

Rescue services were working to recover the bodies, the official said, adding that two people were also injured in the incident.

Ambitions of making money quickly have incited many to turn to illegal archaeological digging, particularly in antiquities-rich locations such as Luxor, Aswan and Cairo.

"We have to work on many levels to stop these get-rich-quick schemes, where people are digging for an illusion," Mansur Boreik, head of the Luxor antiquities department told AFP.

