More ‘Stolen’ Items Mysteriously Turn Up

JE26083 More Stolen Items Mysteriously Turn Up

One of the missing items

In yet another strange twist to the ongoing saga of the looting of the Egyptian Museum in Cairo, two more of the stolen pieces have turned up. Where? Well, that’s the strange part – they were found INSIDE the museum itself during an inventory check of the museum contents.

How could this be?

Were they never actually stolen?

Were they simply ‘misplaced’?

Or were they stolen and then surreptitiously returned?

It is not the first time some of the stolen items were returned under bizarre circumstances. Readers of Talking Pyramids will remember the strange occurrence of the items that were reportedly left inside a black bag at the Shubra station and by sheer coincidence found by an employee of the Ministry of State for Antiquities Affairs (MSAA). This story was later changed, perhaps after it was realised to be too far fetched and unbelievable. The newer version of the same event appeared without any explanation.


Zahi Hawass:

    “We got the objects of King Tut because there was someone working for the antiquities department who came to me and said that there were looters who wanted to return these objects back to me. And the next day he brought a bag with four objects.”

When asked if the looters approached the department official anonymously Hawass fobbed off the reporter’s question with a self-grandurising response:

    “It’s a long story. He was sitting in a café, and heard them talking, and they said they need to return these objects to Zahi Hawass because they trust him.”

But back to the recently discovered items. They were described in a report by Youm7 as follows:
?

    One of the pieces is a bed made of clay while the other is a wooden vase. Both pieces are dated back the Pharonic era, said a member of inventory committee, Raafat al-Nabarawy.??He said the workers found the pieces in storeroom IV of the Egyptian Museum. Consequently, all storerooms of the Egyptian Museum will be inventoried.??El-Nabarawy said the Museum employees did not find the pieces in their glass-case and so thought the pieces were lost. The lost pieces were registered in the list of lost monuments during the initial inventory.??By the time the committee finishes the inventory, a report will be submitted to the Public Prosecutor, Abdel Magid Mahmoud, who appointed the Committee to create an inventory of all pieces in the Egyptian Museum.

