 Gov. Evan Mecham should be removed from office for obstructing an investigation of an alleged death threat, senators were told today during opening arguments of the first-term Republican's impeachment trial. But a defense attonrey for Mecham told senators in an impassioned statement that Mecham was the victim of a ``mutiny'' by the state attorney general and director of the state Department of Public Safety. Prosecutor William French said the man accused of making the alleged threat, former state official Lee Watkins, had claimed that jobs in the Mecham administration ``relate to the amount of money that you were able to bring into the campaign.'' French said the evidence was ``overwhelming'' that Mecham violated criminal laws and his oath of office and committed malfeasance in office, ``any one of which call for impeachment.'' However, defense attorney Fred Craft told senators in his opening statement that Mecham broke no laws and was acting within his authority. ``What has this man done?'' Craft said. ``There's something wrong in this state when you can depose the constitutionally elected officer of the state and throw the book at him ... based upon evidence that's being presented by people who have a stake in the outcome to have him ousted.'' Craft said the accusations resulted from a ``mutiny'' by Attorney General Bob Corbin and DPS Director Ralph Milstead. The DPS includes the Highway Patrol and investigative personnel. Craft also said he would present testimony that would cast dubt on Milstead's integrity. Mecham, who also faces a March 22 criminal trial and a May 17 recall election, did not appear at the Senate on the second day of his impeachment trial. The impeachment counts against Mecham include an allegation that he ordered Milstead not to cooperate with the attorney general's probe of an alleged death threat by Watkins, then the state prison construction chief. ``There was an obstruction with regard to an ongoing investigation that was being conducted by the attorney general's office,'' French said. Watkins has denied making a threat against Donna Carlson, a former top Mecham aide who testified before the state grand jury on Mecham's failure to report a $350,000 campaign loan. DPS Officer Frank Martinez, a former member of Mecham's security detail who was called as the trial's first witness, testified this morning that Mecham administration official Peggy Griffith told him about a conversation she had with Watkins. Ms. Griffith said Watkins had told her that if Ms. Carlson ``did not keep her mouth shut, she could wind up taking a long boat ride ... and I know the right people who can help me,'' Martinez testified. Martinez said that he met with Milstead, other DPS officers, Corbin and several assistant attorneys general several days later and that Milstead told of a conversation he had with Mecham. Martinez said Milstead told the group that Mecham ``stated he didn't want him helping the attorney general.'' ``The overall mood was just amazement,'' Martinez testified. Craft said Milstead and other officials did not fully advise Mecham about the alleged threat, adding that Milstead ``was a feckless employee of this state and he did not serve that governor well.'' French said Watkins complained about the job he was given by Mecham and told Corrections Director Sam Lewis, ``If they don't treat me right I can bring Mecham's administration down.'' French warned the Senate to ``keep your eye on the ball'' and not be distracted by any attacks on witnesses in the case. ``Know that this is being done because there is no defense,'' French said. The opening arguments today dealt only with the alleged threat. Arguments will precede discussion of the other allegations against Mecham as they are reached during the trial. On the trial's opening day Monday, the Senate strongly rejected efforts to dismiss impeachment charges against Mecham. Also, the Arizona Supreme Court was expected to rule today on a defense claim that the impeachment trial, the first of a U.S. governor in 59 years, should be delayed until after Mecham's March 22 criminal trial on charges of concealing a $350,000 campaign loan. The high court last week refused to grant a temporary delay, and Mecham said he planned to take the issue to federal court if necessary. Senate President Carl Kunasek, a Republican, said ``it was the first-day jitters for everyone'' in the impeachment trial's opening day Monday. ``It crosses everybody's mind _ the importance to do justice to the governor and the state,'' said Senate Majority Leader Bob Usdane, also a Republican. ``It's a large burden and we take it seriously.'' Senators refused to dismiss the 23 articles of impeachment against Mecham, whose attorney, Jerris Leonard, entered an innocent plea on his behalf. On 11 separate motions, the largest number of the 29 senators voting for dismissal was seven. Several senators said the vote should not be considered an indication that Mecham is likely to be convicted, saying they want to hear the evidence first. However, Sen. Jeff Hill, a Republican who has strongly backed Mecham, said the governor's conviction was virtually a foregone conclusion. ``I think that it's not likely that he's going to prevail,'' he said. If convicted by the Senate, Mecham would be removed from office and could be permanently barred from holding elective office in Arizona. Mecham, 63, won election in a three-way race after five tries. He has repeatedly denied wrongdoing and insisted he will survive both trials and a May 17 recall election and return to the office he gave up to acting Gov. Rose Mofford, a Democrat, when he was impeached by the House on Feb. 5.