 George Bush reviewed the names of potential running mates with senior advisers Friday, asking ``a few questions about a few people,'' but said he has not made up his mind, a campaign source said. ``He indicated he has not narrowed it,'' the source said. ``We talked about individuals. He's still asking questions and seeking information.'' The source, insisting on anonymity, said Bush told his advisers he thought he would make his decision before he flies to New Orleans on Tuesday for the Republican convention but wasn't sure of that. Meanwhile, Illinois Gov. James R. Thompson, one of more than a dozen people said to be under consideration, called Bush on Friday to ask that his name be withdrawn, citing his family. ``The vice president's job requires a lot of national and international travel,'' Thompson said. ``My wife couldn't travel with me because I've got a 10-year-old in school, and that's not true of the other candidates.'' Bush is spending the weekend in Washington mulling his choice and working on the speech he will deliver Thursday night in accepting the Republican presidential nomination. On his arrival here Tuesday, Bush will join President Reagan at an airport ceremony and then get on a boat to cross the Mississippi River for a welcoming rally downtown. Leaders of Bush's campaign assembled at his headquarters in Washington at 7 a.m. Friday to talk with the vice president about his search for a running mate. The group included Craig Fuller, his chief of staff; campaign manager Lee Atwater; pollster Robert Teeter; media adviser Roger Ailes; press secretary Sheila Tate; former Sen. Nicholas Brady, nominated last week to be Treasury secretary, longtime Texas friend Robert Mosbacher. Bush gave no clue about his preference, the source said. ``He asked a few questions about a few people. He's seeking more information. He hasn't made a decision and he's unwilling to say when he will.'' The source refused to say who was discussed or how many names were reviewed. Afterward, Atwater flew to New Orleans for final preparations for the convention. Among Bush's staff, there were differing opinions on whether he actually has made up his mind but just isn't telling anyone. One official, insisting on anonymity, expressed the view that Bush knows who he wants but is holding it back until the last minute. Gov. John Sununu of New Hampshire, one of the prospects, said he thought Bush should keep it a secret until Wednesday or Thursday. GOP Chairman Frank Fahrenkopf said he is trying to persuade the Bush forces it would be best to announce the running mate choice on Wednesday night after the convention nominates Bush, as Reagan did in 1980 when he chose Bush. Fahrenkopf, in an interview, said that making the announcement on Thursday would undercut the news value of Bush's speech to the convention Thursday night. It would put the only two big news stories of the convention in competition with each other for Friday's front pages. Fahrenkopf said he would favor having Bush come to the convention hall, thank the delegates for nominating him and then ask their support for his vice presidential choice. Meanwhile, Rep. Lynn Martin, R-Ill., a co-chair of Bush's campaign who has been mentioned as a possible running mate, declined to say if she had been asked if she wanted to be considered. However, she said, ``It's not going to be offered and I wouldn't take it.'' People who were contacted by Bush, and asked to provide financial data, include Senate Minority Leader Bob Dole and his wife, former Transportation Secretary Elizabeth Dole, Rep. Jack Kemp of New York, and Sens. Pete Domenici of New Mexico, Dan Quayle of Indiana and Alan Simpson of Wyoming, according to campaign aides. Sen. Nancy Kassebaum of Kansas, rumored to be under consideration, has said she isn't interested in the job. Govs. George Deukmejian of California, Thompson of Illinois, Sununu of New Hampshire and Carroll Campbell of South Carolina and former Gov. Lamar Alexander of Tennessee were also among those on the original list of those under consideration, the aides said. Deukmejian also has asked that his name be withdrawn.