 President Corazon Aquino praised U.S. officials Saturday for indicting Ferdinand Marcos on racketeering charges and said that could deter dictators from robbing the people and seeking asylum abroad. Mrs. Aquino also said that former President Marcos' trial in the United States would hasten recovery of his `hidden wealth'' _ billions of dollars her administration claims Marcos obtained during his 20-year rule. Marcos and his wife Imelda, who have lived in Hawaii since he was ousted in February 1986, were indicted in New York Friday on charges that could send them to jail for 20 years if found guilty. They were charged along with eight associates. The United States alleges that Marcos and his wife embezzled at least $103 million in government funds including U.S. aid and funneled the money to secret bank accounts in Switzerland, the United States and other countries. The couple then allegedly used the money to buy valuable New York properties, the indictment says. ``This (indictment) is certainly welcome news in the Philippines and I commend this evident commitment to the rule of law abroad,'' Mrs. Aquino said in a statement read by her press secretary, Teodoro Benigno. ``I hope that this and other similar efforts undertaken in other countries to investigate the crimes of the Marcoses will lead to the early recovery of the stolen assets that rightfully belong to the Filipino people,'' the statement added. ``Significantly, also, the fact that the Marcoses are being brought to justice will serve as a powerful deterrent to all those who believe themselves above the law and those who would abuse the public trust for private gain.'' Mrs. Aquino's government has accused the Marcoses of stealing up to $10 billion in public and private assets during his rule and hiding the wealth in real estate, shares of stock, works of art, jewelry and bank accounts around the world. News reports on the indictment came too late for Manila's newspapers Saturday but most bannered reports from the previous day that the Marcoses were about to be criminally charged. Political commentator Belinda Aquino _ no relation to the president _ said in a front-page article in the Philippine Daily Inquirer it was ironic that Marcos was being prosecuted for violating U.S. laws and not for crimes committed in the Philippines. ``But what does it matter?'' she said. ``The important thing is that the law has caught up with this rascal at last.'' Officials said Marcos' trial in the United States would delay his prosecution here even further, but noted the U.S. trial could result in the recovery of some of the ``ill-gotten wealth.'' Although it has repeatedly said it will file criminal charges against Marcos, the Aquino government has not done so for fear Marcos would insist on returning to defend himself. The constitution forbids trial in absentia.