 One or more people associated with Jimmy Swaggart Ministries could be targets of a reopened investigation into the slaying of a woman who left part of her estate to the television evangelist's ministry. Vic Feazell, McLennan County district attorney, said Sunday his office is re-examining Ida Lee Baugh's slaying in December 1983 and that a National Enquirer reporter's new information could help him resolve ``unanswered questions.'' Feazell said the inquiry was not aimed at Swaggart but could involve ``one or more individuals connected with the Jimmy Swaggart Ministries at that time.'' ``What we are looking into right now is the possibility of violations of the Texas Penal Code that could include being a party to murder,'' Feazell said. Jacqueline Euna Warren was convicted in April 1984 of murder in the case and sentenced to 99 years in prison. Mrs. Baugh, 70, of McGregor, was found stabbed and beaten and died later at a Waco hospital. Her husband, Maurice Patrick Baugh, died of heart failure five days later. In their will, the couple left all but 25 percent of their cash, not to exceed $25,000, to the ministry in Baton Rouge, La. A Swaggart spokesman estimated the couple's total estate at between $500,000 and $800,000. Baugh's son contested the will, charging that associates of Jimmy Swaggart ministries exercised undue influence on his parents to change their will. Larry Neale Baugh alleged that two men working on behalf of Swaggart Ministries had recommended that Ms. Warren take care of Mrs. Baugh. Later, Larry Baugh dropped his charges. The Waco Tribune-Herald quoted a source familiar with the case as saying a settlement was reached between Baugh and Jimmy Swaggart Ministries. Feazell said a National Enquirer reporter approached him with new information he had developed independently. ``The information was believeable and parts of it have been substantiated,'' he said. Feazell said his office had investigated a possible connection between the murder, the will and Jimmy Swaggart Ministries at the time of Ms. Warren's trial. ``Lot of questions came to light in the spring of 1984 _ unanswered questions that weren't pursued,'' he said. ``I met with Jimmy Swaggart's attorneys at that time. After meeting with him, I decided to take no further action,'' he said. Feazell said that ``as material becomes available, it could be presented to the grand jury'' during the next few weeks. ``It might be something we can wrap up rather quickly, or we could take a long time with it.''