 A year after a military coup ended democratic government in Fiji, the South Pacific nation is still reeling in the aftermath of a conflict that arose over Fijian fears of domination by the Indian population. The economy is shaky, and skilled professionals and civil servants, mostly Indians, are leaving for Canada, Australia and New Zealand at a rate of 500 a month, double the precoup figure. Sugar production, the country's major cash crop is down 20.3 percent; tourism has dropped 26.9 percent, the currency has been devalued 33 percent, inflation has tripled to 6 percent, unemployment has reached 7.5 percent and the gross domestic product is down 11 percent. The coup of May 14, 1987, was led by Lt. Col. Sitiveni Rabuka who claimed that a newly elected coalition government dominated by the decendants of immigrants from India threatened the future of ethnic Fijians. The Indians outnumbered Fijians 348,704 to 329,305 at the time and controlled trade and commerce. The election of an Indian-controlled government led to the army coup. Prime Minister Timoci Bavadra, a Fijian, and his Cabinet were arrested. The Constitution was suspended and rule by decree was put in force. Since then ethnic Fijian fears of Indian political supremacy have eased. But the coup virtually ended organized political activities, but the country is now seeing factional and clan rivalries among Fijian chiefs in a feud over a Fijian king. It was to solve just such rivalries that King Seru Cakobau handed over the islands, then known as the Cannibal Isles, to Queen Victoria of Britain in 1874, after first having tried to interest the United States. Ratu Sir George Cakobau, grndson of the king and a former prime minister, now claims the royal title, which had been vacant since the British took control. But other chiefs and clans are disputing Cakobau's claim to the title. Bavadra, the ousted prime minister, said he feared squabbling among the chiefs could provoke a violent reaction from Fijians feeling the effects of the economic downturn since the coup. Watching the tribal feuds with interest is the 39-year-old Rabuka, who is a commoner. He has become a cult figure to many ethnic Fijians who regard him as the savior of their culture. He is the minister for home affairs in the interim government he appointed to run the country until a new constitution is drafted and elections held. A new book, ``Rabuka _ No Other Way,'' giving Rabuka's account of the coup, became an instant best seller. Also in demand is an autographed color poster of Rabuka in an army T-shirt and bearing the slogan, ``Fiji. In God's Hands.'' A documentary film titled ``Operation Surprise,'' the code name for the coup, has been showing to packed houses. Fiji has has no television. One of the first acts by Rabuka, a Methodist lay preacher, former rugby star and veteran of the United Nations Middle East peace force was to make the religious observance of Sundays compulsory. No shops are allowed to open, no sports can be played, public transport halts and the populace is expected, but not yet compelled, to go to church. But the Sunday observance law has become so unpopular that even the Fiji Council of Churches has called for its repeal. In the best-selling book, written by a Fijian and an Australian, Rabuka says the majority of Fiji's Indians are heathens and should be converted to Christianity. Most of the Indians are Hindus. ``I don't think they will resent it,'' Rabuka is quoted as saying, ``because all we are trying to do is the same thing that missionaries did here in Fiji when we were cannibals and heathens.'' In the year since the coup, Indian leaders have fled or taken a low profile. But one Indian who remains prominent is Irene Narayan, 56, Rabuka's minister for Indian affairs. She said in an interview the Indian community is now without a political leader, but added she saw little likelihood of communal violence between Fijians and Indians,. She expressed the view that while some Indians have left, the majority will remain and probably accept their loss of political rights. ``If Fijians want dominance and they are happy with it, perhaps that's not high a price for Indians to pay,'' Mrs. Narayan said. Meanwhile, Fiji's relations with traditonal friends and neighbors are taking time to mend. Australia, New Zealand and the United States condemned Rabuka's coup. They called their ambassadors home and suspended aid, but the envoys of all three have since returned. Australia and New Zealand have resumed non-military aid, but relations remain chilly.