 A protest within sight of the Kremlin on Monday produced passionate debate on Mikhail S. Gorbachev's reforms by bystanders and several dozen Jews seeking to emigrate. In a gathering that police had difficulty controlling, at least 100 people stopped along Kalinin Prospekt, a major avenue leading to the Kremlin, to watch the refusenik protest and to argue their views about Gorbachev's effort to rebuild Soviet society. Despite constant appeals by police using bullhorns to stop blocking the walkway next to the Lenin Library, the refuseniks and onlookers argued in small groups under a hot late afternoon sun. Dozens of others pressed around to hear, oblivious to the police. There was no violence, and the demonstrators, who were among those not invited to a meeting with President Reagan at the U.S. ambassador's residence, left after about an hour. ``This is a country that it's impossible to leave, like a prison,'' said 50-year-old Moscow resident Aaron Greenberg, responding to an elderly man who said the United States observed human rights no better than the Soviet Union. Greenberg said he has been waiting five years for permission to emigrate, but that officials claim he had access to state secrets in a postal job he held 25 years ago. Another bystander who identified himself as Georgy Gusev held up a piece of white paper on which he had drawn a Star of David and a swastika. ``Zionism is fascism,'' he said, citing Israeli occupation of Arab territory. But pressed by angry refuseniks, he said he thought that anyone who wanted to leave the Soviet Union should be free to do so. Other bystanders shouted that the protest was hurting Gorbachev during his meetings with Reagan. One woman who stopped by blamed the refuseniks' problems on bureaucrats whom Gorbachev has been unable to clean out of the Soviet system. ``The bureaucrats all stay in place, and while they are in place on top there won't be perestroika below,'' said Zoya Urisheva. ``If everything was in order, we wouldn't have a refusal problem.'' Vladimir Meshkov, a Moscow Jew who said he has been refused permission to leave for seven years, shouted ``Let us go to Israel'' a half-dozen times as the demonstration ended and police began escorting the last of the protesters to a nearby train entrance. Meshkov, his wife Lida and three and his family held signs during the protest claiming, ``Refusal is a form of murder.'' He said he had been beaten severely twice this year during demonstrations. ``They are really trying to kill us,'' he said. Yuri Semyonovsky, who said he has been refused permission to emigrate for two years, said said of the meetings between Reagan and Gorbachev, ``we expect there will be progress but we don't know how deep it will be.'' One of the protesters added, ``I expect maybe Mr. Reagan will challenge Mr. Gorbachev's idea of democracy, as a leader of a really democratic country.'' Others held banners calling for a ``World without missiles or refusals,'' asking the United States for asylum, and proclaiming themselves prisoners of the KGB secret police and the Soviet visa office. Avi Weiss, head of the Student Struggle for Soviet Jewry and the National Center for Russian Jewry of New York, stopped to talk to the protesters after he and five others conducted a protest for 18 minutes on Red Square earlier in the afternoon. He said the group ``insisted Gorbachev free all our people,'' and demanded that the United States make trade with the Soviet Union depended on the Soviet human rights policy. The demonstration broke up without incident, he said.