 For all the grand designs of the presidential nominees, a large number of Americans believe neither candidate could deliver on most of his campaign promises, a Media General-Associated Press poll has found. About half the 1,125 adults in the national survey saw both men as strong leaders, with Michael Dukakis rated by more as compassionate and George Bush rated by more as competent to manage the federal government. But just 36 percent said Bush could accomplish most of his stated goals in office, and only 31 percent said Dukakis could do most of what he wants. Nearly half said either would be stymied in office; the rest were unsure. Seven in 10 respondents agreed nonetheless that the outcome of the election will have a major impact on the nation's future. But they were divided evenly, 45-45, on whether the election will affect them personally. Results of the poll, conducted the week after Labor Day, underscored Bush's success since the Republican Convention at controlling the campaign agenda. Fifty-two percent said he had clear positions on the issues, while just 37 percent said the same of Dukakis. The results were released Monday. Bush also was perceived as the better government manager, 50-34, despite Dukakis' claim to the issue. And 77 percent said Bush understands the complex problems a president faces, while only 44 percent said that of Dukakis. Bush won overwhelming endorsement as better able to maintain a strong defense, chosen over Dukakis by 67 percent 15 percent. Bush was narrowly seen as more likely to cut the federal deficit, 38-30. In a measure that bodes well for an incumbent party, six in 10 said they were better off now than they were four years ago or eight years ago, and 55 percent expected their family finances to improve in the next few years. Bush had mixed success in his effort to paint Dukakis as more likely to raise taxes: A plurality, 45 percent, said there wasn't likely to be any difference between the two when it comes to that issue. Dukakis was rated higher than Bush on some personal issues. Sixty-two percent said Dukakis cares about people like them, while 50 percent said that of Bush. Forty-two percent said Bush sometimes talks carelessly, without considering the consequences; just 30 percent said that of Dukakis. The two were about equal in some other ratings: Six in 10 said both offer a vision of where they want to lead the country and five in 10 said both were strong leaders. Six in 10 said Bush would have good judgment under pressure and five in 10 said that of Dukakis. Bush was rated as better for the rich and Dukakis as better for the poor, but respondents were split on which would do more for the middle class. They were nearly split on which candidate would do more to improve education, with 39 percent choosing Dukakis and 33 percent Bush. Bush led solidly among respondents who said they plan to vote and had definitely made a choice, partly because a greater share of Republicans said they had decided. The gauge is a different one than in other national polls. Fifty-seven percent said they planned to vote and had made a definite choice; they favored Bush by 56-39. Dukakis led, 48-42, in a late June-early July poll, indicating that even opinions expressed as firm are movable. The poll found a three-way split in ideology, with about a third each calling themselves Republicans, Democrats and independents. Other recent polls had similar results, a departure from the longtime Democratic lead in this measure. The Media General-AP poll was conducted the week after Labor Day, Sept. 6-14, among a random sample of adults nationwide. It had a margin of error of plus or minus three percentage points for all respondents, four points for those who said they planned to vote and had chosen a candidate. Media General Inc., a communications company based in Richmond, Va., publishes the Richmond Times-Dispatch, the Richmond News Leader, the Tampa (Fla.) Tribune and the Winston-Salem (N.C.) Journal, and operates TV stations WXFL in Tampa, WCBD in Charleston, S.C., and WJKS in Jacksonville, Fla.