 An Ohio prison inmate who took two guards hostage at gunpoint and fled in a rented Cadillac with his wife and 9-year-old stepdaughter was captured Friday, crossing from Mexico into El Paso, Texas. Michael Day, 31, of Athens, who escaped Sunday from the Ross Correctional Institution in Chillicothe, was arrested without incident about 6:30 p.m. EDT as he crossed the Santa Fe-Juarez bridge, officials at the prison said. His wife, Sylvia Carraveo Day, had been arrested about 2 p.m. as she crossed the same bridge, and Mrs. Day's daughter was also in custody, the FBI's El Paso office said. Day and his wife were in the El Paso city jail Friday night and will be arraigned Tuesday before a U.S. magistrate, authorities said. The FBI, El Paso police and authorities from Ohio and Indiana took part in the arrest. Day, serving an 18- to 25-year sentence for burglary and othger felonies, escaped with a pistol officials said was sent to him in a television set. Karen Albert, 29, of Athens was arrested and charged Monday with sending the gun. Day took his two hostages in a prison jeep to a Holiday Inn here, where his wife and stepdaughter waited with a getaway car. He handcuffed one guard to the jeep and the other to a towel bar in a room registered to his wife. A blue Cadillac that Mrs. Day rented Sunday night at the Columbus Airport Sunday night was found Friday morning near the international bridge, Ross Correctional spokeswoman Sandy Price said. Authorities staked out the area near the car and waited for the Days to return, Ms. Price said. She said authorities believe Mrs. Day has relatives in Texas and possibly in Mexico. Ms. Price said the stepdaughter would be released to Mrs. Day's parents. Day was convicted of attempted abduction, burglary, receiving stolen property and carrying a concealed weapon after a felony conviction, Ms. Price said. He had been at the Ross prison since June 1987 and had served at the Chillicothe Correctional Institute and Ohio State Reformatory in Mansfield since April 1985, and married while he was in prison.