 The Soviet Union has notified the United States it is destroying radar facilities at Gomel that President Reagan told Congress violated a superpower arms control treaty, the State Department said Wednesday. However, the installation at Krasnoyarsk remains in dispute. Department spokesman Charles E. Redman again called for its destruction. Redman said the United States would not reciprocate for the Soviet decision on Gomel. ``A violation is a violation,'' he said. Reagan claimed in his report to Congress last week that portable equipment had been moved to the Byelorussian city in violation of the 1972 Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty. The treaty limits U.S. and Soviet radar on the theory a nuclear attack is less likely to be launched if devastating retaliation would follow. Redman said destruction of the Gomel radar ``when fully carried out and verified will satisfy our concerns regarding the illegal deployment of these radars.'' The Soviets informed the United States that destruction of the Gomel installation began last Friday, according to a U.S. official who spoke only on condition of anonymity. Redman said the Soviet decision underscored the importance of continuing the Reagan administration's policy ``of firmness'' with regard to Soviet treaty violations. ``However,'' Redman said, ``the more crucial issue of the Soviet violation at Krasnoyarsk remains unresolved. The Krasnoyarsk radar is a significant violation of a central element of the ABM treaty, which will continue to make it impossible for the US to conclude any future strategic arms agreements.'' The two sides had agreed in Geneva last month to resume work on a treaty o sharply reduce long-range nuclear bombers, missiles and submarines. Redman rejected again a Soviet proposal to turn the Krasnoyarsk installation in Siberia into an international space research facility. ``It would not remove the treaty-prohibited radar capability,'' he said. ``Nor would it restore the lead time'' the Reagan administration contends Krasnoyarsk would provide for mounting a defense against U.S. ballistic missiles. ``What the Soviets propose would allow them to move forward with work on the illegal radar, with no guarantees that the `international scientists' could not be expelled at a moment's notice,'' Redman said.