 Secretary of State George P. Shultz urged Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir to accept an international peace conference and give up occupied territory for Middle East peace. ``The agenda, as we see it, has to be territory for peace,'' Shultz said in an interview broadcast today by Israel radio. ``If you say no ... then there is no Arab partner that wants to come and negotiate, because they say, what is there to negotiate.'' Shultz was interviewed Friday in Washington. The army imposed a curfew on parts of Gaza City this morning after Palestinians demonstrated, a military spokesman said. He did not elaborate. An Arab reporter said there was a full general strike throughout the Gaza Strip and scattered stonethrowing clashes between soldiers and protesters. He said at least three Palestinians were beaten by Israeli troops. Both the military spokesman and reporter spoke on condition of anonymity. Since anti-occupation unrest broke out Dec. 8 in the occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip, Israeli soldiers have killed 191 Palestinians. Two Israelis also have been killed. Shultz stopped short of directly criticizing Shamir, but he said the United States and the Israeli leader disagree on the need to give up territory captured during the 1967 Middle East war in exchange for peace. Disputes remain on the international peace conference and the timetable of negotiations. ``Everybody has views that they hold and ... which we discuss,'' said Shultz. ``Some of the things that the prime minister feels about the proposals we've put on the table of course we don't agree with.'' Shultz urged the Israeli government to accept his peace proposal, which includes a call for an international peace conference and negotiations on Palestinian demands for self-rule. ``The status quo is not stable, is not satisfactory,'' Shultz said. Shultz has visited the Middle East twice since drawing up his peace proposal and is due back again in June. Israel's coalition government is split on the proposals. Shamir's right-wing Likud Bloc opposes the plan, while the leftist Labor Party, led by Foreign Minister Shimon Peres, supports it. Shultz has failed to budge Shamir. So far, Egypt is the only country to officially endorse the plan. But Shultz said he would keep trying. ``It's not my initiative or the U.S. initiative that's in trouble,'' Shultz said. ``It's the region that's in trouble. And that's why I keep coming back.'' Peres returned Friday from Washington, where he met with Shultz and President Reagan. In an airport interview, he said the Soviet Union has agreed to join an international peace conference on the Middle East but continues to insist on Palestinian self-determination. Peres said Soviet officials told him they now agreed the international conference would not have the power to impose its views on Israel and its Arab negotiating partners. Both Shamir and Peres reject establishment of an independent Palestinian state in the occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip. Peres met with Soviet officials in Madrid and Washington, including Moscow's U.S. ambassador, Yuri Dubinin.