 PORT-AU-PRINCE, Haiti (AP) _ Activist priest Jean-Bertrand Aristide on Wednesday accused the Roman Catholic Church of plotting his ouster and also warned of popular unrest unless the Haitian government made democratic reforms. In a message transmitted over private radio and television stations, Aristide attacked the hierarchy of Haiti's Roman Catholic Church for not speaking up against an order to transfer him to Canada. Thugs attacked Aristide's St. Jean Bosco Roman Catholic Church on Sept. 11, killing 13 worshipers and wounding many more. It is believed the church attack was responsible for Lt. Gen. Henri Namphy's overthrow as Haiti's leader shortly after. Rank-and-file soldiers said they were tired of state-sponsored violence. Wednesday was the first time Aristide spoke out publicly since his Salesian Order superiors in Rome ordered him to leave Haiti on Oct. 17. The order prompted demonstrations by his followers and Aristide remains in Haiti. The Salesians have not acted since giving Aristide the October deadline. ``You are plotting against me, give me a chance to look at you straight in the eyes,'' Aristide said in his eight-minute message to Haitian bishops. The speech was transmitted by most radio stations except church-operated Radio Soleil. Aristide also lashed at the bishops for ``never commenting on the order to transfer me.'' He also warned Lt. Gen Prosper Avril, the Haitian president, to ``make a purge in the country and stop the uncertainty'' by Nov. 29 because ``the people are watching over you.'' Avril came to power in a Sept. 17 coup staged by non-commissioned officers who overthrew Namphy. Avril promised democratic reforms, including municipal and legislative elections. On Tuesday, Avril declared Nov. 29 a national day of mourning for dozens of voters massacred at polling stations nearly a year ago by armed thugs. Aristide accused Avril of ``playing like Francois Duvalier,'' the late dictator, by calling for elections before bringing to trial those known to have carried out atrocities such as the Election Day massacre. Duvalier and his son Jean-Claude ruled Haiti for 29 years. Aristide charged Avril's government had not cracked down on the remaining Tonton Macoutes, the feared secret police of the Duvalier regime, and brought them to trial.