 Convicted child-killer Arthur Gary Bishop, having fired his attorneys and abandoned appeals of his death sentence, expressed sorrow for his crimes Friday as a judge scheduled his execution June 10. Third District Judge Frank G. Noel signed the death warrant after Bishop read a brief statement explaining why he had decided to forego appeals of his convictions for the sex-related abductions and slayings of five boys from 1979 to 1983. ``In reflecting back on my life, I remember a lot of good things, but these are overshadowed by the things I have done,'' Bishop said. ``I wish I could make restitution somehow, but I don't see how I can.'' Bishop, 38, was allowed to fire his attorneys and drop appeals last month after he was found competent to decide his fate. Bishop, his hands shackled in front of him as he stood to read his hand-written statement, said his apology to his victims' families following his 1984 conviction may not have been as sincere as it should have been. Near the conclusion of the 10-minute hearing, he said he was restating his apology with ``heartfelt empathy. ... Again, I say I am truly sorry for all the anguish.'' ``I wish I could go back and change what happened, or that by giving my life these five innocent lives could be restored,'' said Bishop, his voice low but steady. Utah law provides for execution by lethal injection or firing squad. Bishop previously had indicated he preferred lethal injection. Bishop was convicted on five counts of first-degree murder, five counts of aggravated kidnapping and one count of sexual abuse of a minor following a six-week trial in 1984. In a confession to police, Bishop said he killed the boys, ages 4 to 13, to prevent exposure as a child molester. On Monday, the Utah Supreme Court lifted Bishop's stay of execution and remanded the case to district court for the setting of the execution date. Should Bishop change his mind about seeking execution, any federal appeals must be filed by late May, three months after the Utah Supreme Court's Feb. 29 denial of a petition for rehearing filed by Bishop's former attorneys.