 Record-breaking heat scorched both coasts Sunday, wilting several major league pitchers and sending residents in the normally cool San Francisco Bay area streaming to the beaches. The mercury soared to a record 103 degrees in downtown San Francisco. It was the city's highest temperature since record keeping began 125 years ago, exceeding the previous mark of 102 degrees set on Oct. 5, 1987. On the East Coast, Philadelphia hit a record high for the date of 102 degrees, which was also a record fifth day in a row of triple-digit highs. Downtown Baltimore set a record high for the date of 103 degrees. In California, the heat heightened the danger of fire and and led officials to close Mount Diablo State Park in Contra Costa County, east of San Francisco, and parts of Mount Tamalpais, northwest of the city, officials said. By noon, the parking lot at Marin County's Stinson Beach was jammed, and motorists inched along several miles of roads leading to the area. National Weather Service forecasters said tempertures won't fall to normal levels in the 80s until Thursday. Forecaster Daryl Williams blamed the heat on a high-pressure area over the southwestern United States, which he said is keeping cooler Pacific air out of the area. Temperatures also soared above 100 in the inland valleys of southern California, sending many to the beaches despite chilly and overcast coastal conditions. About 100,000 people hit the sands at Zuma Beach, where the temperature was about 70 degrees on the beach and in the water, said lifeguard John Renaud. Crowds also were heavy at Santa Monica, Venice, Will Rogers and Topanga beaches despite morning temperatures of around 69 degrees and fog that reduced visibility to a mere 100 years, said lifeguard Lt. Dick Heineman. ``It was so hot in the valley areas, they just came to the beach anyway,'' he said. In Baltimore, two major league baseball teams were able to score nine runs despite the searing heat, and the visiting pitcher refused to take off his long-sleeved undershirt during the game, saying he was superstitious. Frank Viola of the Minnesota Twins became the first American League pitcher to win 15 games this season by surviving the minimum five innings and leading his team to a 7-2 victory over the Baltimore Orioles. ``That was the hottest situation I've ever pitched in,'' Viola said. Starting pitchers in Oakland, Calif., and Boston also tired early in the heat. Other record highs were 97 at Allentown, Pa.; 100 at Charleston, W.Va.; 100 at Newark, N.J.; 98 in downtown Oakland; 97 at Raleigh, N.C.; and 107 at San Jose and 104 at Santa Rosa, Calif. ``Lemonade Lassies'' in shorts will be dispensing cool drinks on street corners in Bluefield, W.Va., again Monday after the Appalachian town sweltered through a weekend with highs of over 90 degrees. Bluefield bills itself as ``Nature's Air-Conditioned City'' and hands out free drinks whenever the mercury tops 90. The Chamber of Commerce has gone whole summers in past years without doling out a drop of lemonade, but this summer the heat is sending the civic group to the poorhouse, chamber member Eddie Steele said. ``We've had to do it about five or six times, which is the most we've had in 10 or 15 years,'' Steele said. ``It costs about $100 a time to serve it.'' Ohio officials blamed high heat as the likely cause of last week's death of a 2-year-old girl whose body was found in a sweltering attic. Lorain County deputy coroner Dr. Richard Buchannan said the body of Ashley Kasubienski was discovered by her parents Friday. Initial tests showed the child was ``severely dehydrated,'' and the death appeared to be heat-related, he said. In Pasadena, Calif., authorities confiscated dozens of rabbits, pigeons, chickens and geese after finding about 20 animals that had died after having been purchased at an auction and stuffed inside cardboard boxes for a sweltering truck ride, police said. Authorities were investigating possible animal cruelty charges against three unidentified people, police Sgt. John Olquin said.