 Senators of both parties on Saturday hailed the plan to free black leader Nelson Mandela from a South African prison and called on both sides in that strife-torn nation to begin meaningful negotiations. ``It's the right move,'' Senate Minority Leader Bob Dole, R-Kan., said. ``Now comes the real test for South Africa _ will there be peace as meaningful negotiations move forward? Let's hope so.'' The comment came in a statement released by Dole's office after South African President F.W. de Klerk announced that the African National Congress leader would be freed Sunday after 27 years. De Klerk also said the state of emergency under which freedoms have been suspended in South Africa could be lifted within weeks if conditions of stability prevail across the country following Mandela's release. Sen. Edward M. Kennedy, D-Mass., chief Senate sponsor of legislation to impose sanctions on South Africa, said in a statement that ``freedom for Nelson Mandela means that freedom is closer for all the people of South Africa.'' ``His unjust imprisonment has long been the symbol of the cruelty and injustice of the racist system of apartheid.'' Kennedy said. He expressed hope that ``today's historic development marks the beginning of a genuine commitment by President de Klerk and his government to dismantle all aspects of apartheid as soon as possible.'' Sen. Paul Simon, D-Ill., said in a telephone interview that the release of Mandela along with de Klerk's other remarks were ``welcome and significant.'' ``It is significant because without this there could be no real negotiations and when you couple this with President de Klerk's statement that within a few weeks he's going to completely lift the state of emergency, you have the conditions for a successful resolution of all this,'' he said. Sanctions against South Africa imposed by the United States and European countries were credited in large part for the change in course on the part of the South African government. The U.S. sanctions, imposed in 1986, barred new American investment in South Africa, including bank loans to the government; prohibited the import of South African iron, steel, coal, uranium and agricultural products, including sugar; prevented the United States from exporting computers to South Africa; banned all nuclear trade; and halted landings by South African Airways. The chairman of the Congressional Black Caucus, Rep. Ron Dellums, D-Calif., said that the United States ``should continue to use the moral and economic lever of even more stringent sanctions as a vehicle for helping to accelerate and expedite the end of apartheid in a nonviolent context.'' ``While I welcome the release of Nelson Mandela from almost three decades of imprisonment for his political beliefs, I am concerned that no mention has been made about the release of more than 2,000 other black South Africans still in prison because of their struggle to end apartheid,'' Dellums said. Rep. Connie Morella, R-Md., who recently traveled to South Africa, issued a statement calling the release of Mandela ``a major step forward for President de Klerk'' and ``one indication that the winds of democracy that have swept across Europe may be reaching South Africa.'' ``However, before sanctions are relaxed or eliminated, several additional steps must be taken,'' she said. ``These include release of the many remaining political prisoners, lifting of the state of emergency and removal of troops from the townships.'' New York Mayor David N. Dinkins said Mandela ``could have been released a long time ago if he had compromised his principles.'' ``He is an inspiration to all those seeking freedom who will not compromise and I look forward to his unconditional release and the day all South Africans will be free,'' Dinkins said. ``Just because we freed one man doesn't mean we freed an entire nation,'' said Rep. William H. Gray III, D-Pa., the House majority whip and author of legislation imposing U.S. sanctions against South Africa. Rep. John Lewis, D-Ga., said Mandela's release marked ``a significant step'' toward peaceful political change in the country. However, Lewis, a former activist in the U.S. civil rights movement, also urged political leaders here to ``continue to apply pressure on the South Africa government in the form of economic sanctions.'' Randall Robinson, leader of the Washington-based anti-apartheid group TransAfrica, said pressure from the United States and Europe produced the release of Mandela. He described it as a ``tiny step.'' ``Political prisoners must still be released, parliament must repeal apartheid laws and until these things are done it is too early to evaluate the good faith of President de Klerk,'' he said. ``This is only the release of one great man,'' he said. Sen. Jesse Helms, R-N.C. and a leading conservative, was not planning a comment on the development, an aide said. Dole was the only Republican with a comment despite calls to spokesmen for several prominent GOP members of Congress.