 The House on Tuesday rejected legislation to protect homosexuals from harassment after an ugly debate in which one lawmaker labeled colleagues bigots and others called gay men and lesbians perverts. The House defeated the measure 118-80. Its sponsor, Rep. Babette Josephs, a Democrat, said after the vote she was unsure what move to take next, but vowed not to let the issue die. Under the measure, the same state law that gives special protection to religious, racial and ethnic groups would have been extended to include homosexuals. The bill would have extended the tougher penalties for bias crimes to protect people who are thought to be homosexual. ``We have a growing and serious problem of violence against people perceived to be gay or lesbian,'' Ms. Josephs said. ``The problem is real, pervasive and growing.'' In one of the most impassioned speeches of the debate, Rep. Thomas Murphy Jr., said he was disturbed by discussion and jokes around him on the House floor slamming homosexuals. ``This is bigotry in action. You don't have to go a local bar or sports stadium to hear bigotry, you can sit on the House floor and listen to it,'' Murphy said. ``Your snickers say you're bigoted. You don't condone a different lifestyle.'' Opponents of the bill criticized not only the measure, but also homosexuality. ``I feel in my heart and in my gut that to pass this bill is wrong,'' said Rep. Howard Fargo, a Republican. ``It's wrong to do anything legislatively to promote sexual perversion. It's wrong to do anything legislatively that would lead to the further deterioration of the traditional family and its values.'' Supporters said the issue was not one of morality, but of law and order. One group lobbying in favor of its passage, the Pride of Philadelphia Election Committee, which supports gay rights candidates, had distributed a pack of letters from supporters including Gov. Robert Casey's administration. Rep. Karen Ritter, a Democrat, said Pennsylvania had the most homosexual-related murders in the nation last year. ``We are not providing special treatment to perversion as has been suggested. Bigots who are unsure of their own sexuality have already singled out homosexuals for special treatment through violence,'' Ms. Ritter said.