 Here is a chronology of the Iran-Contra affair from the kidnapping of the first American hostage in Beirut to the conviction Saturday of former National Security Adviser John Poindexter: 1984 March 7 _ Cable News Network correspondent Jeremy Levin is kidnapped in Beirut. Levin, freed 11 months later, is the first of 16 Americans to be taken hostage. Five were either freed or escaped. University librarian Peter Kilburn and CIA Beirut station chief William Buckley were murdered. Among the eight still held is Terry Anderson, chief Middle East correspondent for The Associated Press. Summer _ Iranian purchasing agents put out a call for weapons, including TOW anti-tank missiles. 1985 July _ An Israeli official suggests a deal with Iran to then-National Security Adviser Robert McFarlane, saying the transfer of arms could lead to release of the hostages in Lebanon. McFarlane takes the message to President Reagan. Aug. 30 _ The first plane load of U.S.-made weapons is sent from Israel to Tehran. McFarlane and Donald Regan, White House chief of staff, later disagree on whether Reagan approved the shipment. Reagan says he doesn't remember. Sept. 14 _ A second arms shipment is sent to Tehran. Sept. 15 _ An American hostage, the Rev. Benjamin Weir, is released. Dec. 4 _ McFarlane resigns as national security adviser and is succeeded by Rear Adm. John Poindexter. Dec. 5 _ Reagan signs a presidential ``finding'' describing the operation with Iran as an arms-for-hostages deal. Poindexter later testifies that on Nov. 21, 1986, he tore up the only copy of the finding. Dec. 5 _ In discussions with Israeli officials about Iran arms shipments, North mentions plans to use the profits to support the Contras. 1986 Jan. 17 _ Reagan signs a secret intelligence finding authorizing CIA participation in the sales and ordering the process kept secret from Congress. February _ The first direct shipment of arms from Pentagon stocks is sent to Iran. April _ North writes a memo outlining plans to use $12 million in profits from Iran arms sales for Contra aid. May 25 _ North and McFarlane fly to Tehran with shipment of spare parts, expecting hostages to be freed. Negotiations break down. Sept. 26 _ Iranian middlemen deposit $7 million into a Swiss bank account. More spare parts and TOWs are prepared for shipment. Oct. 5 _ North flies to West Germany to meet with an Iranian contact who says he can obtain release of one hostage for 500 TOWs. Nov. 2 _ American hostage David Jacobsen, held since June 1985, is freed. Nov. 4 _ A pro-Syrian news magazine in Beirut breaks the news that McFarlane had flown to Iran to meet and negotiate with officials there. Nov. 13 _ The White House admits selling arms to Iran, despite a public policy of supporting an international arms boycott of the nation, which it has branded a terrorist state. Reagan denies the administration has bargained with terrorists or sold arms for hostages. Nov. 21 _ CIA Director William Casey briefs the Senate Intelligence Committee on the arms deal, but makes no mention of the diversion of funds. North and his secretary, Fawn Hall, shred, alter and remove documents from his office. Nov. 25 _ Reagan announces North has been fired and Poindexter has resigned. Attorney General Edwin Meese discloses that $10 million to $30 million in arms-sale profits were diverted to Contras. Nov. 26 _ Reagan sets up the Tower Commission to review the role of National Security Council. Dec. 1-3 _ The Senate Intelligence Committee begins an inquiry by questioning McFarlane. North and Poindexter, meanwhile, invoke the Fifth Amendment. Dec. 19 _ Lawrence Walsh is appointed independent counsel to investigate the deal. Both houses of Congress select investigating committees. 1987 Feb. 18 _ The Tower Commission rebukes Reagan for failing to control the national security staff. March 4 _ Reagan acknowledges in a televised speech his Iranian initiative deteriorated into an arms-for-hostages deal. ``It was a mistake,'' he says. April 29 _ Carl ``Spitz'' Channell pleads guilty to illegally raising funds for the Contras. He was sentenced to two years probation. May 5 _ Congressional Iran-Contra hearings begin with testimony from retired Air Force Gen. Richard Secord, who describes how $3.5 million in proceeds from arms sales to Iran were diverted to Contras. May 6 _ Casey dies. May 11 _ McFarlane begins four days of testimony, during which he says Reagan instructed his staff in 1984 to find ways around the congressional ban on U.S. military aid to Contras. July 7 _ North testifies that he had authorization from his superiors to divert arms-sale money to the Contras, and that Casey knew of it all along. North says he always assumed Reagan knew about it. But he says he never discussed the plan with the president or received written presidential authorization for it. July 15 _ Poindexter testifies he never told Reagan that the arms sale proceeds were being diverted to the Contras. Poindexter says Reagan authorized a straight arms-for-hostages swap in December 1985. Nov. 18 _ The final report of House and Senate investigating committees concludes Reagan bears ultimate responsibility for the Iran-Contra affair because he allowed a ``cabal of the zealots'' to seize control of policy and bypass the law. Committee Republicans dissent, saying the mistakes amounted only to errors of judgment.