 The night he was arrested on a cocaine possession charge, Mayor Marion S. Barry Jr. made repeated sexual advances to the woman reported to have helped the FBI lure him to the room, law enforcement sources said Thursday. Barry, who the FBI says was videotaped buying and smoking crack cocaine, kissed and touched Rasheeda Moore during his visit to her hotel room, the law enforcement sources said. She rebuffed him, said the sources, who spoke on condition of anonymity. According to an FBI affidavit filed in connection with the misdemeanor drug possession charge, agents used a surveillance camera located in an adjacent room during Barry's 45-minute visit to Ms. Moore's room at the hotel Thursday night. During the visit, the mayor spoke in a decisive voice while conducting city business on the telephone, said one source. The account of sexual advances was first published Thursday in The Washington Post. Barry on Monday checked into a rehabilitation center in West Palm Beach, Fla., after turning over his duties to city administrator Carol Thompson. In developments Thursday: _ Prosecutors delayed the appearance of two of Barry's bodyguards before a grand jury. A scheduling conflict with federal prosecutors investigating Barry's ties to a convicted drug dealer forced the postponement, a source familiar with the probe said. Four members of the mayor's security detail, who are assigned to the mayor on a round-the-clock basis, have been subpoenaed to testify about whether they have knowledge of any Barry drug use, said law enforcement and city government sources. _ Business, labor and community leaders were meeting Thursday night to discuss plans to encourage Jesse Jackson to become a candidate in the November mayoralty election. Meanwhile, however, Jackson complained in comments in The New York Times that the mayor's position had ``zero political leverage.'' _ Former comedian Dick Gregory, who spent several days immediately following Barry's arrest at the mayor's residence, said in Las Vegas that Barry's closest friends were ``tickled to death'' to see that he was seeking help. However, Gregory said at a Las Vegas meeting that he was angry that the federal government has spent so much time and effort in arresting the mayor. _ Bush administration drug policy coordinator William J. Bennett said Barry's arrest ``might be one of these watershed kind of events that changes peoples' attitudes and makes people really realize they have to do something.'' Law enforcement and other sources say Ms. Moore, 38, had a longstanding romantic relationship with the mayor but began cooperating with the FBI's investigation several weeks ago following her arrest on a drunken driving charge near her home in Burbank, Calif. She had been told by the FBI not to have sexual relations with Barry during Thursday night's sting operation, law enforcement sources said. She also was instructed not to smoke any crack or to make any suggestion about using illegal drugs, to avoid any subsequent defense claim of entrapment, the sources said. Barry himself raised the subject of drugs, and purchased a small quantity of crack cocaine from an FBI undercover agent posing as a friend of Ms. Moore, according to a court affidavit and sources. Ms. Moore began cooperating with the FBI after her arrest in North Hollywood, Calif. Jan. 1. The FBI, which had lodged a ``material witness warrant,'' was put in touch with her, authorities in California said. She agreed to cooperate in the sting operation after being confronted with grand jury testimony she gave last spring during which she denied using cocaine with the mayor, sources said. They said she told investigators that she and Barry used drugs on repeated occasions over a number of years, including a March 1988 weekend trip to the Virgin Islands. Her story corroborates testimony by convicted drug dealer Charles Lewis, who said he used cocaine with Barry during the Virgin Islands trip and at a downtown hotel in the nation's capital. Law enforcement sources say prosecutors are trying to build a perjury case against the mayor, who denied in sworn grand jury testimony that he ever used illegal drugs. The grand jury has called additional witnesses, including members of the mayor's security detail. A native of Washington, Ms. Moore graduated from modeling school here and has posed in the past for such national magazines as Essence. She was employed by the city government as a social worker in 1987 and 1988, according to a statement this week by the mayor's office.