 Here is the official text of the European Community statement on South Africa issued Saturday. The European Community and its member states have consistently followed developments in South Africa with the greatest attention and have given a favorable reception to the initiatives which have been to bring about the abolition of apartheid and the establishment of a united, non-racial and democratic South Africa. They have already expressed approval of the results of the talks between the government and the ANC (African National Congress), in particular those of the Pretoria meeting in August which opened the way to the negotiation of a new constitution. They deplore the phase of serious violence through which South Africa is passing, which may endanger these developments. They welcome, however, further indications serving to confirm that the process of change already begun is going ahead in the direction advocated by the Strasbourg European Council. They have decided to continue to encourage this process. Against this background, the European Council has decided that as soon as legislative action is taken by the African government to repeal the Group Areas Act and the Land Acts, the Community and its member states will proceed to an easing of the set of measures adopted in 1986. As of now, so as to contribute to combating unemployment and improving the economic and social situation in South Africa, and to encourage the movement under way aimed at the complete abolition of apartheid, the European Council has decided to lift the ban on new investments. At the same time, the Community and its member states, with the objective of sending a clear message of political support to the victims of apartheid, and intending to contribute to a new economic and social balance in South Africa, have agreed to strengthen the program of positive measures and to adapt it to the requirements of the new situation, including requirements related to the return and resettlement of the exiles. The Community and its member states hope in this way to be able to contribute to the speeding up of the process under way through sending to all the parties involved in negotiations a concrete sign of support for the establishment of a new South Africa, united, non-racial and democratic and capable of resuming the place which it deserves in the international community.