 Up to 14 inches of snow fell Thursday over the mountains of the West and extended onto the southern Plains, while locally heavy rain fell over parts of the South. Record high temperatures were posted in the East. Overnight snow accumulations in Nevada included 14 inches at Mount Charleston, 12 inches at Goodsprings and Sandy Valley and 8 inches at Red Rock. Mount Charleston had 36 inches of snow on the ground at 9 a.m. Snowfall Wednesday and overnight into Thursday across Arizona included 18 inches at Ash Fork, up to 10 inches at Prescott, 5 inches at Cottonwood, and 1 to 3 inches at Flagstaff, Grand Canyon, Sedona, Payson and Bisbee. In southern Colorado, 4 inches of snow had fallen at the San Luis Valley at midmorning and snow was falling at the rate of 1 inch an hour at Wolf Creek Pass. Wind gusted to near 70 mph at Albuquerque, N.M., and to 80 to 100 mph in eastern sections of the city. In Texas, 2 inches of snow covered the ground at Amarillo at noon, with 5{ inches across the west side of town. ``The plows are out, it's still snowing and it's slick in spots,'' said a Department of Public Safety dispatcher in Dalhart, Texas. By 3 p.m., 6 inches of snow had fallen on the northern Panhandle city, and it was still snowing heavily. Two- and 3-inch overnight snowfalls were reported over the western two-thirds of the Oklahoma Panhandle. And 2 inches of snow fell during the morning at Hugoton, Kan. Ahead of the snow, showers and thunderstorms reached across northern Texas, western and southern Oklahoma, Louisiana, southern Arkansas, Mississippi, and southern Alabama. Tyler, Texas, got 1.71 inches of rain overnight, Longview, Texas, got 2.01 inches and up to 3 inches of rain was reported over Houston County. Thunderstorms also produced almost an inch of rain during one hour along with small hail at Abilene, Texas. Rain also fell over sections of southeastern California, southern Nevada and northern Arizona, changing to snow at higher elevations. Light rain was scattered over northeastern Ohio and northwestern Pennsylvania. Record highs included 70 at Baltimore; 62 at Boston; 54 at Burlington, Vt.; 57 at Concord, N.H.; 66 at Harrisburgh, Pa.; 64 at Philadelphia; 58 at Portland, Maine; 71 at Roanoke, Va.; 68 at Washington; and 65 at Wilmington, Del. Thursday's low for the Lower 48 states was 22 degrees below zero at Yellowstone National Park. Temperatures around the nation at 3 p.m. EST ranged from 6 degrees below zero at Yellowstone to 85 at Tampa, Fla.