 The third game of the world chess showdown was adjourned Monday night after five hours, with neither world champion Garry Kasparov or challenger Anatoly Karpov clearly in control. The first game was a draw and Kasparov won the second game. Play was halted just after 10:30 p.m. when Kasparov wrote down his 41st move and sealed it in an envelope. The game was set to resume Tuesday at 5:30 p.m. when the match arbiter will open the envelope. Spectators said the players were in an unclear position. ``There are chances for both sides and I predict a draw,'' said Dmitri Gurevich, a grand master from Chicago. ``I think the position is better for black (Kasparov), but white (Karpov) has good chances of surviving and getting a draw,'' said international master Vitaly Zaltsman of Brooklyn. In the adjourned position, white has a king, rook, bishop, knight and four pawns. Black has a king, two bishops, a knight and five pawns. ``The adjourned position is a complete mess. Nobody knows what's happening,'' said Joel Benjamin, a grand master from Manhattan. Kasparov, 27, the highest-rated player in the history of chess, leads 1{ points to { points in the 24-game title match against Karpov, 39, the former world champion he unseated in 1985. Karpov played with the white pieces in Game 3, which originally was to be played Friday. Observers said they weren't surprised when Karpov - an introverted, methodical, player - postponed it until Monday: confidence is an important factor in this game of psychological warfare. The arch-rivals have played more than 120 games with each other. The majority of them, like Game 1 of this match, were draws. Kasparov dominated Game 2 thoroughly. In the third game, Kasparov, playing the black pieces, repeated his choice of opening from the first game - the King's Indian Defense. But Karpov, with his fifth and sixth moves, adopted a different system, known as the Classical Variation. Karpov used 1{ hours to play his first 15 moves. Kasparov used 21 minutes for his first 14 moves, then thought 41 minutes about move 15 - a quiet knight retreat. Karpov then decided to accept Kasparov's offer of the queen. But Kasparov's 23rd move trapped Karpov's queen, and forced an endgame in which Karpov had an extra rook but Kasparov had an extra bishop and two pawns that appeared very dangerous. Former Soviet dissident Nathan Sharansky, who is regarded as a strong amateur player, was in the press room analyzing the third game.