 Leftist guerrillas demanded negotiations for the release of two U.S. citizens they kidnapped this week to protest President Bush's visit to Colombia, a news report said. One other American was also reported captured by the guerrillas to protest Bush's one-day visit Thursday for a regional drug summit. Authorities said they had no word on the third American, a Roman Catholic priest from Rochester, N.Y. Parishioners prayed for his return. The television program 24 Hours said Friday night that relatives of James Donnelly, one of the captives, were contacted by the abductors. It said they demanded a committee be formed to negotiate the terms to release Donnelly and fellow captive David Kent. The abductors did not provide details on the conditions they would put forward during such talks, the report said. It also was not clear who the abductors wanted on the committee. Donnelly, a 65-year-old mechanical engineer from Detroit, and Kent, a 40-year-old school teacher from Indianapolis, were separately kidnapped in the northwestern city of Medellin on Tuesday. The pro-Castro National Liberation Front made public Friday night a communique claiming responsibility for their abductions. Officials also blame the group for kidnapping the priest, the Rev. Francisco Amico Ferrari. He was abducted Thursday in the southwestern city of Cali. The guerrillas said the summit in the Colombian resort city of Cartagena between Bush and the presidents of Colombia, Peru and Bolivia was part of a design for ``the military control of our (Colombian) territory.'' The summit approved a joint fight by the four nations against drug trafficking. A police spokesman contacted in Medellin by telephone said the police knew nothing of the guerrillas' demands. Roman Catholic Church bishops in Cali issued a statement calling for the abductors to release Amico. The bishops also condemned guerrilla bomb attacks Thursday at two Mormon temples run by American pastors. Damages were estimated at $12,000, but no injuries were reported. Medellin and Cali are homes to the drug cartels named after them. The cartels are blamed for more than 80 percent of the cocaine entering the United States.