 The country's top opposition leader said Friday he may visit North Korea to discuss reunification and ways to ease tension on the divided peninsula. If Kim Dae-jung makes the visit, he would be the first South Korean political leader to visit the Communist country since the 1950-53 Korean War. ``The visit will be by myself or a party delegation,'' Kim said. Kim, head of the largest opposition political group, the Party for Peace and Democracy, said the visit would be arranged with government approval. An unauthorized visit would violate National Security Laws. Kim declined to elaborate on his plans and said he would announce further details next week. The opposition leader said he raised the possibility of a trip in talks with President Roh Tae-woo on Thursday and said Roh responded favorably. There was no comment Friday from Roh's office. If Kim visits the North Korean capital of Pyongyang, party officials said he would expect to contact Communist officials. Officials of Kim's party said the visit may take place in the first half of the year. Aides to Kim said the primary purpose would be to meet North Korean President Kim Il Sung and help create a good atmosphere for an inter-Korea summit. Roh has proposed a meeting with the North Korean president several times in the past two years, but his proposal has not been addressed specifically by the North Koreans. Two days ago, Roh told a nationally televised news conference that he wanted to meet Kim Il Sung to discuss possible free travel between the two nations. In a New Year's speech, the North Korean leader invited Roh and South Korean opposition leaders to the North for unification talks. Government officials said the invitation was a ploy to lump Roh and opposition leaders in the same category, thus undermining Roh's leadership. Government officials said the opposition leader's indictment on charges related to the other lawmaker's secret trip to North Korea would not pose a problem for his own trip. The 64-year-old opposition leader was indicted last summer for allegedly failing to report to authorities the 1988 secret trip to North Korea of one of his party's lawmakers. Kim has denied the charge. Several dissident leaders are in jail for making unauthorized trips to North Korea. Vice Unification Minister Song Han-ho said South Korea would propose creating a hot line with Pyongyang so military leaders can communicate in an emergency. Song also said his government plans to propose peaceful uses for the demilitarized zone between the two countries, exchanges of military personnel, prior notification of major military exercises and invitations for delegates to observe such maneuvers. The two nations have opened several channels of talks on personnel, economic, parliamentary and political exchanges since the early 1970s but have made little progress. Reunification is a frequent demand of anti-government protesters.